Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  381
Examining Neural Tissue
In this investigation, you will examine microscope 
slides of neural tissue, along with some corresponding 
photographs. As you observe the tissues and make 
diagrams, identify the specialized structures that 
allow neurons to carry out their functions.
Question
How does the structure of different neurons relate to 
their functions?
    
Safety Precautions
Handle the microscope slides with care, so they do not 
break and cut you.
Materials 
• microscope
• prepared neural slides similar to, but not limited to, 
the ones shown below
Procedure
Observe each slide provided by your teacher, as well as the 
micrographs below, and identify any key neural structures.
Analysis 
 1.  Slide and micrograph 1 show a cross-section of the 
brain. Sketch your observations, and label the white 
and grey matter. Describe the structural differences 
between the two types of neural tissue.
 2.  Slide and micrograph 2 show a cross-section of a nerve. 
Sketch your observations, and label the nerve bundles 
and neurons. Explain the basic function of a neuron.
 3.  Slide and micrograph 3 show a cross-section of the 
spinal cord. Sketch your observations, and label a 
sensory neuron, a motor neuron, and an interneuron. 
(Hint: See Figure 11.6.) Explain the function of each 
neuron, and trace the neural pathway.
 4.  Slide and photograph 4 show several unmyelinated 
neurons. Sketch one neuron that you can see, and 
label the basic structures. Indicate the direction of 
impulse transmission down the neuron. 
 5.  Slide and micrograph 5 show a longitudinal view of a 
myelinated axon. Sketch your observations, and label 
the axon, the myelin sheath, a Schwann cell, and a node 
of Ranvier. Describe the functions of the myelin sheath.
 6.  Slide and micrograph 6 show a view of the 
neuromuscular junction between the dendrites of a 
motor neuron and the receptors on a muscle ﬁ bre. 
Sketch your observations, and label the motor 
neuron, muscle ﬁ bre, and synapse. Hypothesize how 
the impulse coming from the motor neuron might 
reach the muscle ﬁ bre (effector).
 7.  Observe and sketch any additional slides provided 
by your teacher.
11.C
INVESTIGATION
 Target Skills
Observing neurons and neuromuscular 
junctions with a microscope
Identifying the principal structures in 
different types of neurons, and relating 
these structures to their functions
1  White and grey matter 2  Cross-section of nerve 3  Cross-section of spinal cord
4  Unmyelinated neurons 5  Myelinated axons 6  Neuromuscular junction
Magnification: 7 × Magnification: 6.125 × Magnification: 0.5 ×
Magnification: 39 × Magnification: 228 × Magnification: 28 × 
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   162 3296_Chapter_11.indd   16 11/4/06   6:18:23 PM11/4/06   6:18:23 PM