Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  393
The Brain
The proportions of the areas of the brain differ in 
different mammals, but the basic locations of the 
functional areas are similar. In this investigation, you 
will use models, photographs, and a mammalian brain to 
learn about the principal structural areas of the brain and 
their functions. As an alternative to doing the dissection, 
the photographs in this investigation, or a video or web 
dissection, could be used. 
Question
What are the principal structures of the brain, and what 
are their functions?
      
Safety Precautions
• Use caution when handling sharp instruments.
• Wash your hands well when ﬁ nished the dissection.
• Disinfect the equipment and area when ﬁ nished.
Materials
• preserved sheep brain • dissecting tray
• paper towel • dissecting kit
• 10 percent bleach solution 
(to clean the dissecting tray)
Part 1:  Lateral View—Whole Brain
Procedure
 1.  Obtain a sheep brain from your teacher. Follow 
your teacher’s instructions for rinsing the brain. 
Then place the brain in the dissecting tray.
 2.  Examine photograph A, showing a lateral view of the 
sheep brain. Identify the frontal, parietal, temporal, 
and occipital lobes of the cerebrum. 
A  Lateral view—whole brain
 3.  If possible, examine the outer surface (dura mater) 
of the brain. Notice the convolutions and ﬁ ssures on 
the outer surface. Also notice that the cerebrum is 
divided into a right side and a left side.
 4.  Sketch and label the outer surface of the brain.
Analysis
 1.  Make a table to record the functions of the structures 
you labelled in your diagram.
 2.  In humans, the left and right cerebral hemispheres 
of the brain are associated with different dominant 
functions. Describe these differences.
Part 2:  Lateral View—Cross-Section
Procedure
 1.  Examine photograph B, showing a cross-section of 
the sheep brain. 
 2.  Make a gentle incision through the corpus callosum 
of the sheep brain to separate the right and left 
hemispheres. Then separate the rest of the brain by 
cutting through the centre of the mid and hind parts.
 3.  Using photograph B as a guide, identify, sketch, and 
label the following structures: spinal cord, cerebellum, 
medulla oblongata, pons, midbrain, thalamus, 
hypothalamus, pituitary gland, corpus callosum, and 
cerebrum. Try to identify the small olfactory bulbs 
(connected to smell receptors) on the underside of 
the frontal lobes, as well.
B  Lateral view—cross-section
11.D
INVESTIGATION
 Target Skills
Observing and identifying the 
principal features of a mammalian 
brain using dissections or other means
Compiling and displaying data in 
appropriate forms
Working cooperatively as a team to 
investigate a neurological disorder
continued on next page 
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   282 3296_Chapter_11.indd   28 11/4/06   6:19:59 PM11/4/06   6:19:59 PM