Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  395
• The forebrain includes the thalamus 
and hypothalamus, involved in sensing 
the external and internal environment, 
as well as the cerebrum. 
• The outer layer of the cerebrum, called 
the cerebral cortex, is composed of grey 
matter, and is thought to be the source 
of human intellect. 
• The right and left halves of the cerebral 
cortex are made of four pairs of lobes, 
each of which is associated with 
particular functions: frontal lobes 
(conscious thought and movements, 
speech), parietal lobes (touch, taste), 
temporal lobes (hearing and speech), 
and occipital lobes (vision). 
• MRI and PET scans are non-invasive 
tools that can be used to map human 
brain function and screen for diseases.
BiologyFile 
Web Link
Research a disorder of the 
brain, such as Alzheimer’s 
disease or Parkinson’s 
disease. Identify the speciﬁ c 
area of the brain that is 
affected, and describe the 
resulting loss of function. 
Include current research 
ﬁ ndings and the prognosis 
for people who have these 
disorders. 
@www
www.albertabiology.ca
A B
 1.  Explain why the brain has elevated requirements for 
nutrients and oxygen.
 2.  Describe the three main tissues that support and protect 
the central nervous system.
 3.  Explain why a physician takes a sample of cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid to determine if a person has meningitis.
 4.  The letters on the diagram indicate possible areas of 
brain damage. In table format, list the possible areas 
of brain damage (A to G), and describe the functional 
problems that might result from damage in each area.
!
"
#
$
%
&
'
 5.  Use graphics software to sketch the cerebral cortex. Use 
it to identify the lobe that would be stimulated in each 
situation, and explain why. ICTICT
  a) Seeing this question.
  b) Thinking about this question.
  c) Hearing this question read to you by someone else.
  d) Reading this question to someone else.
  e) Reading this question using Braille.
 6.  A stroke has caused damage to certain areas of a 
person’s brain. Upon examination, a doctor notices that 
the person has difﬁ culty understanding speech and the 
left side of the body is paralyzed. Identify the speciﬁ c 
areas of the brain that are damaged, and explain how 
this damage might cause the symptoms.
 7.  Explain how MRI and PET scans can be used to 
improve our understanding of human brain function.
Review
Section  11.2
Figure 11.33  (A) A detailed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of a healthy brain (B) An MRI 
image of the brain of a person with Creutzfeldt-Jakob’s disease. The affected areas are shown at 
the centre in red. People with Creutzfeldt-Jakob’s disease experience memory loss, emotional 
instability (including inappropriate outbursts), and unsteadiness. These symptoms progress to 
marked weakness, dementia, and death, often within a year of the onset of the symptoms.
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   302 3296_Chapter_11.indd   30 11/4/06   6:20:04 PM11/4/06   6:20:04 PM