Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  403
 16. Explain how one neuron can inhibit the actions of 
another neuron.
Applying Concepts
 17. In a classic experiment, the strength of a neural stimulus 
and the resulting muscle contraction are compared. A 
single motor neuron that synapses with a muscle ﬁ bre is 
suspended. The other end of the muscle ﬁ bre is attached 
to a mass. If an electrical stimulus is sufﬁ cient to cause 
an impulse in the neuron, the muscle will contract and 
lift the mass. The following data were obtained from the 
experiment. Analyze the data, and answer the following 
questions.
Strength of stimulus 
(mV)
Mass lifted by muscle 
contraction (g)
10
21 0
3?
4?
  a) Deﬁ ne “threshold potential. ” What is the minimum 
size of the stimulus required to reach the threshold 
potential for this motor neuron?
  b) Explain the all-or-none response. Then predict the 
mass that could be lifted at 3 mV of stimuli and at 
4 mV of stimuli.
  c) Choose a speciﬁ c example of a sensory neuron, and 
explain neural stimulation and impulses in terms of 
the threshold potential and the all-or-none response. 
 18. One of the tragic consequences of Alzheimer’s disease is 
progressive memory loss. The memory pathways in the 
brain are complex and involve several different areas. 
Name the lobe of the cerebral cortex that is most related 
to memory, and state three other functions of this lobe.
 19. Researchers are experimenting with new technologies 
that could help people with missing limbs. In one 
experiment, electrodes implanted in the nervous tissue 
of a monkey were connected to an artiﬁ cial hand. The 
monkey’s nervous system was able to direct the artiﬁ cial 
hand to move. This photograph shows the monkey 
raising a piece of zucchini to its mouth using the 
thought-controlled robotic arm.
  a) What area of the brain directs the movement of the 
robotic arm? (Assume that the structure of a monkey 
brain is similar to the structure of a human brain.)
  b) Using a ﬂ owchart, illustrate the basic neural pathway 
from the sensory stimulus to the motor output. 
  c) Compare this artiﬁ cial pathway with the actual 
neural pathway to a biologically functional limb. 
  d) What are some other potential applications for this 
technology?
  e) Do the beneﬁ ts to human life justify this form of 
animal research?
 20. Describe a safeguard that prevents a neuron from 
carrying an impulse in the wrong direction. What 
would be the effect of an impulse travelling in both 
directions in a neuron?
 21. One way to model the action potential is to line up 
several dominoes and initiate a cascade event, in which 
each successive domino knocks down the next domino.
  a) In this model, the hand provides the initial energy. 
What provides the initial energy in a neural impulse?
  b) The ﬁ nger has to contact the ﬁ rst domino just hard 
enough to get it to fall. Which response does this 
represent in a real neuron?
  c) Once the dominoes start to fall, they all fall in 
succession. What does this action represent in the 
real neuron?
  d) The dominoes always fall in one direction. Contrast 
this with the direction of impulse transmission in a 
real neuron. 
  e) No matter how many times the dominoes fall, they 
always move at the same speed and intensity. What 
principle does this represent in the real neuron?
Making Connections
 22. Meningitis is an infection of the meninges, which cover 
the brain and spinal cord. It is diagnosed by a spinal tap, 
which involves analyzing a sample of the cerebrospinal 
ﬂ uid. Explain why the same information could not be 
determined from a regular blood sample. 
 23. Based on what you know about threshold potential, 
explain why some people seem to be more tolerant of 
pain than others. 
 24. If food is not preserved properly, Clostridium botulinum 
bacteria can start to reproduce and release a neurotoxin 
called botulinum toxin. Botulinum toxin inhibits the 
action of acetylcholine, causing botulism. What 
symptoms would you expect to observe in someone 
suffering from botulism? Provide an explanation.
3 3296_Chapter_11_Review.indd   23 3296_Chapter_11_Review.indd   2 11/4/06   6:20:56 PM11/4/06   6:20:56 PM