392  MHR  Unit 5  The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
Broca’s Area and Wernicke’s Area
The process of speech involves several 
areas of the cerebrum. Two important 
areas are on the left side of the cerebral 
cortex: Broca’s area and W ernicke’s 
area (see Figure 11.29). Broca’s area 
coordinates the muscles for speaking and 
translates thought into speech. Damage 
to this area results in an inability to 
speak. It does not, however, affect the 
understanding of language. Wernicke’s 
area stores the information involved in 
language comprehension. The ability to 
utter words is not affected if this area is 
damaged, but the words make little sense. 
2 Identify the four lobes of the 
cerebrum, and describe the 
function of each.
2 Describe the primary areas of 
the brain that are responsible for 
the ﬁ ne motor control of the 
muscles, as well as the area that 
processes sensory information 
from the skin. 
2 Compare the locations and 
functions of Broca’s area and 
Wernicke’s area in the brain.
  
  
Mapping Brain Functions 
Scientists ﬁ rst learned about brain 
functions by studying the brains of 
people with brain injuries or diseases. 
For example, injured soldiers would 
sometimes have damage to certain areas 
of the brain, but still survive. Researchers 
could then link the injured area of the 
brain to loss of functions in other areas of 
the body. In 1848, an accidental explosion 
at a railway site drove a metal bar through 
the frontal lobes of railway worker, 
Phineas Gage (Figure 11.31). Although he 
survived the accident, he experienced a 
type of personality change that scientists 
have now come to associate with frontal 
lobe injuries. Once considered 
reasonable and conscientious, Phineas 
Gage was described after the accident as 
“thoughtless, irresponsible, and ﬁ tful. ”
 Because the brain itself does not 
contain any pain receptors, neurosurgeons 
are able to probe areas of the brain while 
people are conscious. This provides 
useful feedback about the functions of 
different areas of the brain. Canadian 
Nobel prize recipient Wilder Penﬁ eld 
(1891–1976) contributed greatly to our 
knowledge of the sensory and motor 
areas of the brain. Penﬁ eld, who operated 
on people with epilepsy, applied electric 
currents to the surface of their brains in 
order to ﬁ nd the problem areas. Since 
the people were awake during the 
operations, they could tell Penﬁ eld 
what they were experiencing. Probing 
different areas triggered different 
sensations and body movements. From 
this information, Penﬁ eld was able to 
map the sensory and motor areas of the 
cerebral cortex. As well, Penﬁ eld probed 
certain areas of the cerebral cortex that 
triggered whole memory sequences. For 
one person, Penﬁ eld triggered a familiar 
song that sounded so clear the person 
thought it was being played in the 
operating room. When Penﬁ eld stopped 
stimulating this area of the brain, the 
music ceased immediately. 
Imaging Techniques 
Used to Study the Brain
Modern imaging techniques provide 
non-invasive ways for researchers to 
As Phineas P . Gage, a foreman on the railroad in 
Cavendish, was yesterday engaged in tamping 
for a blast, the powder exploded, carrying an 
iron instrument through his head an inch and 
a fourth in circumference, and three feet and 
eight inches in length, which he was using at 
the time. The iron entered on the side of his 
face, shattering the upper jaw, and passing back 
of the left eye, and out at the top of the head.
 The most singular circumstance connected 
with this melancholy affair is, that he was 
alive at two o’clock this afternoon, and in full 
possession of his reason, and free from pain.
Figure 11.31  The news report of Phineas 
Gage’s accident first appeared in the Free Soil 
Union (Ludlow, Vermont) on September 14, 
1848.
BiologyFile 
Web Link
Anatomy students often 
use computer simulations 
to complete animal 
dissections. You can try 
out a virtual sheep brain 
dissection online. What 
are some beneﬁ ts and 
drawbacks to using virtual 
dissections for learning? 
@www
www.albertabiology.ca
BiologyFile 
Try This
While sitting at your desk, 
lift your right foot off the 
ﬂ oor and make clockwise 
circles. While doing this, 
draw the number 6 in the 
air with your right hand. 
Your foot should change 
direction! Why does 
this happen?
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   272 3296_Chapter_11.indd   27 11/4/06   6:19:56 PM11/4/06   6:19:56 PM