The Crucible – Act Three
Arthur Miller

Choose Your Own Path
Answer the following items completely.

1. Act Three is the climax of The Crucible. Discuss.

2. Identify the voice of reason in Act Three. Cite and discuss supporting evidence.

3. What does Abigail’s refusal to answer Danforth’s questions show about the status the
trials have given her?

4. It was noted previously that public reputation makes or breaks one in Salem. How is
the importance of reputation reflected in Act Three? In answering, consider who lies
in Act Three (Elizabeth, Parris) and their motivation for doing so.

5. It  seems  that  every  time  John  Proctor,  Giles  Corey,  and  Francis  Nurse  try  to  defend
their wives, they are accused of trying to overthrow the court. What would Reverend
Parris  have  to  lose  if  the  defense’s  case  was  seriously  considered?  What  would
Danforth and the judges have to lose?

The End of the Road
Complete each of the following activities.

6. Some of Salem’s accused attract trouble because they stand up for  those  already
arrested.  The  court  clearly  believes  in  guilt  by  association.  What  do  you  think  about
the  theory  of  guilt  by  association?  Have  you  ever  experienced  it?  Can  it  ever  be
valid? Explain your answer.

7. Danforth states that “a person is either with this court or [...] must be counted against
it, there be no road between.” In other words, there is no room for disagreement as far
as  he  is  concerned.  What  are  some  modern  day  scenarios  where  those  in  authority
have taken that approach? Are there instances where this type of thinking is justified?

Ongoing Activity (II)
As  promised,  the Reverend  Hale  continues  to  develop  as The  Crucible progresses.  In
monitoring his character, you are advised to consider
a. why Hale suggests Proctor have a lawyer, and what this reveals about Hale’s
attitude toward the trial. Is this a change?
b. what evidence exists that Hale no longer believes the testimony and crying of
Abigail and her cohort.
