GG
GG
G
ENERALENERAL
ENERALENERAL
ENERAL
  P  P
  P  P
  P
SYCHOLOGYSYCHOLOGY
SYCHOLOGYSYCHOLOGY
SYCHOLOGY
  20  20
  20  20
  20
SSN2172SSN2172
SSN2172SSN2172
SSN2172
  Distance  Distance
LearningLearning
   Distance   Distance
LearningLearning
CentreCentre
CentreCentre
Alberta Alberta 
AlbertaAlberta

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Copyright © 2003, by Alberta Distance Learning Centre, 4601-63 Avenue, Barrhead, Alberta, Canada, T7N 1P4.
No part of this courseware may be reproduced or transmitted in any form, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying (unless
otherwise indicated), recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without the written permission of Alberta Distance
Learning Centre.
Every effort has been made both to provide proper acknowledgement of the original source and to comply with copyright law. If cases
are identified where this effort has been unsuccessful, please notify Alberta Distance Learning Centre so that appropriate corrective
action can be taken.
Printed and bound in Canada
IT IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED TO COPY ANY PART OF THESE MATERIALS UNDER THE TERMS OF
A LICENCE FROM A COLLECTIVE OR A LICENCING BODY.
General Psychology 20
Student  Module  Booklet
Alberta Distance Learning Centre
ISBN 1-894894-01-4
Publisher: Alberta Distance Learning Centre
Director: Ralph Helder
Senior High Principal: Pat Von Loewenstein
Curriculum Coordinator: Eugene MacIntyre
Alberta Distance Learning Centre has an Internet site that you may find useful.
The address is as follows:
http://www.adlc.ca
The use of the Internet is optional. Exploring the electronic information superhighway can be educational
and  entertaining.  However,  be  aware  that  computer  networks  are  not  censored.  Students  may
unintentionally or purposely find articles on the Internet that may be offensive or inappropriate. As well,
the sources of information are not always cited and the content may not be accurate, therefore  students
may wish to confirm facts with a second source.
INTERNET
Original content revised and adapted in May 2002 by the Alberta Distance Learning Centre with permission
from the Learning Technologies Branch of Alberta Learning. Present content revised November 2003 by the
Alberta Distance Learning Centre.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
General Psychology 20 was designed to be a stand alone course to meet student needs.
Throughout this course, basic competencies (knowledge, skills, and attitudes) will be identified as
follows:
Assignment: Indicates that you are
to turn to the appropriate
assignment book to complete
related activities.
Idea: Presents an interesting idea or
thought that is important. May be
followed by an activity or
assignment.
Internet: Indicates that additional
information is available via the
Internet.
Reading: Directs your attention to
do additional reading either within
the module or additional sources.
Reminder: Serves as reminder to
do an important task or activity, or
may be used to reference previously
read material.
Research: Illustrates that you are
required to use additional resources
to complete a specific activity or
assignment.
Writing: Indicates that you are to
do some form of writing outside of
the assignment book.
These basic competencies build daily living skills useful in a broad range of future endeavours and
careers.
The seven icons that appear here indicate to students and teachers that a basic competency has
been identified in the activity offered to the students. Not all of the icons appear in each course.
We hope you’ll enjoy your study of
General Psychology 20 (SSN2172)
WW
WW
W
ELCOMEELCOME
ELCOMEELCOME
ELCOME
!!
!!
!
A
INTERNET



IntroductionGeneral Psychology 20................................................i
Study  Hints............................................................................ii
Assessment ..............................................................................   iv
Section 1Introduction to Psychology
Lesson   1:Psychology  –  A  Look  Into  the  Past  ....................         1
     Summary ...............................................................................   22
Section 2Learning and Cognitive Processes
Lesson   1:The Principles of Learning .....................................   23
     Summary ...............................................................................   60
Lesson   2:   Thinking  and  Memory..........................................   63
     Summary ...............................................................................   90
Section 3Studying Behaviour
Lesson   1:Roles  and  Group  Influences .................................     93
     Summary ............................................................................... 133
Lesson   2:Emotions  and  Criminal  Behaviour ...................... 136
     Summary ............................................................................... 184
Lesson   3:   Neurosis................................................................. 187
     Summary ............................................................................... 207
Lesson   4:   Psychosis................................................................ 209
     Summary ............................................................................... 233
X
X
X
X

Section  4
XX
XX
X
Making  Choices
Lesson   1:Mastering Your  Life ............................................... 235
     Summary ............................................................................... 266
Glossary................................................................................ 269

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Introductioni
General Psychology 20
II
II
I
NTRODUCTIONNTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTIONNTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
Welcome to General Psychology. The aim of this course is to provide you with a general background in psy-
chology including the history of psychology and the principles of learning and thinking. You will also learn about
stress and aggression, the influence of small groups, the status of roles, and some insights regarding neurosis and
psychosis.
No course in general psychology would be complete without some discussion of emotion and behaviour
and as such this course concludes with a section about self-improvement and self-growth. Good luck and enjoy.

iiIntroductionGeneral  Psychology  20
Assessment
The document you are reading is a Student Module Booklet. It shows you, step by step, what to do and
how to do it.  General Psychology 20 is worth three Alberta high school credits and should take about 75
hours to complete. The course is comprised of four sections. Within each section, the work is grouped into
activities such as readings, explanations, and questions.
Your course materials also include eight Assignment Booklets that you will complete and submit for
grading. A portion (40%) of your final mark is based on these assignments.  Assignment Booklets are of
equal value. The mark distribution is as follows:
Assignment Booklet One
Section 1 Lesson 165 marks
Assignment Booklet Two
Section 2 Lesson 183 marks
Assignment Booklet Three
Section 2 Lesson 266 marks
Assignment Booklet Four
Section 3 Lesson 191 marks
Assignment Booklet Five
Section 3 Lesson 265 marks
Assignment Booklet Six
Section 3 Lesson 350 marks
Assignment Booklet Seven
Section 3 Lesson 463 marks
Assignment Booklet Eight
Section 4 Lesson 170 marks
Assignment Total553  marks   =  40% of Final Course Mark
Final Exam60% of Final Course Mark

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Introductioniii
Strategies for Completing the Course
•   Make sure that the Student Module Book and the Eight Assignment Booklets are included when you
receive your Course Package, as well as any other materials that are listed.
•   Assemble pens, a notebook, your booklets, and the other items you will need.
•   Settle yourself in a quiet place where you can concentrate and you have room to work.
•   Highlight items of importance as you complete the readings and activities. You can review them at
the end of each work session to make study notes in your notebook. As well, you may wish to use
your notebook to answer questions or make additional notes regarding the details of activities and
assignments.



ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
11
11
1
SS
SS
S
11
11
1
SS
SS
S
ECTIONECTION
ECTIONECTION
ECTION
OO
OO
O
NENE
NENE
NE
Introduction to Psychology
Lesson 1: Psychology – A Look Into The Past
Overview
Lesson 1 will focus on these topics:
•   The Nature of Psychology
•   Basic Goals of Psychology
•   Wundt’s Fist Psychological Laboratory
•   Freud, the Most Famous Psychologist
•   Freud’s Theory of Personality
•   Carl Jung: Extravert/Introvert
•   The Behaviourists’ Theories
•   The Humanists’ Ideas – Maslow and Rogers
•   An Eclectic View
•   Sleep and Dreams
Wilhelm Wundt
German Psychologist

22
22
2Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
What  is  Psychology?
One hundred years ago, the word psychology was a strange new word to the average
person. Today people use it frequently to describe events in their everyday lives. Books
on psychology line the shelves of many bookstores. Drugstores display magazines with
many articles on psychology-related subjects. Even the comics deal with
psychoanalysis, IQs, and hypnosis.
Why is it that psychology has gained such popularity? The answer is fairly simple. The
study of psychology is the study of ourselves. From earliest times, people have been
curious about their own nature. For example, they wondered what actually happened in
their dreams when they would be visiting faraway places or doing impossible things
like flying through the air. Yet when they awoke, they would be in the same place
where they had lain down to sleep. How could that be explained? Was there an
invisible person inside who took these journeys while the body remained behind? What
left the body when people died and ceased to breathe, to talk, to laugh, and to touch?
Gradually, from these questions the idea of a soul developed. Later the Greeks named it
the psyche which is the mind or the soul. The Greek word logia means a study of
something. Therefore, psychology is the study of the mind or soul. Today
psychologists no longer use the word “soul” when speaking of the study of this science.
Watch for a modern definition of psychology in the following paragraph.
Psychology became the study of the mind and its various faculties. The mind was
thought to exist separately from the body. As the study of psychology developed,
psychology limited its investigations to the study of consciousness. The consciousness
is what a person feels, thinks, or is aware of in some way like colours, shape, smell,
pain or other sensations. But even the definition of psychology as the study of
consciousness soon proved to be inadequate. Why was this true? It was found that a
good deal of behaviour and even a certain amount of thinking took place beneath the
conscious level in the realm we now call the unconscious. Therefore, today the
meaning of psychology has been broadened to include the study of all behaviour,
whether conscious or unconscious. We may now define psychology as the science of
human behaviour.
consciousness –
awareness of
some element of
the  surroundings
psychology – the
science of human
behaviour

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
33
33
3
Psychology involves curiosity and the desire to describe, explain, predict, and control
conditions within our environment and within ourselves. Having some control over the
events in our lives is certainly an advantage. Then we do not become “victims of fate”
for whatever circumstances come our way. It is also important for people to have a
sense of control over their own development so they have the power to reach out for
the self improvements they desire.
The  Goals  of  Psychology
As a science, psychology has some important goals to achieve. First, psychology must
observe and record facts in order to understand what is happening. The goal of
psychology is to find an accurate description of human behaviour.
Sometimes it is very difficult to achieve an objective description of behaviour for many
different reasons. Human behaviour is very complex and may be interpreted in a
number of ways. A psychologist may not find it easy to maintain an unbiased attitude
when describing the behaviour that has been observed. Furthermore, the psychologist
must distinguish between what is actually observed and what a person might infer
from witnessing a situation. Can you notice the difference between the two in these
examples?
In an actual observation the psychologist would say, “The person smiled, laughed, and
danced around the room.”
In an inferred observation the psychologist would say, “The person was overwhelmed
with happiness.”
A second goal of psychology is to explain the data that
has been collected. That task may seem straight
forward, but it is complicated by a number of factors.
One of these obstacles is the psychologist’s basic theory
about the nature of human beings. Are people born
“bad” or “born in sin”? Do parents have to firmly
discipline and mold the actions of the young in order to
curb this “bad” streak they have? Are people born
“good”? Do people have a natural tendency to follow a
behaviour that is “right and good” if they are given a
chance? Are people completely neutral as newborn
babies with no inclination to follow either pathway? In
fact, does a parent have complete control to shape the
responses of a baby in either a positive or negative
way?
infer – to
interpret  data
from one’s
personal  point  of
view

44
44
4Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
These questions are fascinating. Opinions will differ a great deal between you and
someone else about what is really “the truth”. You may be relieved to know that
opinions on these questions swing from one extreme to the other among knowledgeable
psychologists throughout the world. Later on in this lesson you will learn about a few
of the psychologists who have made quite an impact on the study of human behaviour
with the theories of human nature they have proposed.
A third important goal for psychology is to seek to know the future regarding human
behaviour. That is sometimes an impossible task because it means predicting and
preparing for events before they happen. The hypothesis is somewhat useful in
reaching for this goal. A psychological hypothesis is a sophisticated hunch that a certain
response is related in a particular way to some other response or condition. Sometimes
the predictions a psychologist makes will be accurate if:
•   observations have been done with care, and
•   the basic theory that is used has been sound
There are also many instances when predictions will prove to be wrong. Why?
Because, as we have said before, human behaviour is very complex, and, quite
truthfully, not even the most talented and conscientious psychologist has it completely
figured out!
How  Did  Psychology  Gain  Recognition?
For centuries, psychological thought has held the attention of great philosophical
thinkers as well as that of the average citizen. Some of the brilliant Greek philosophers
like Socrates, Plato and Aristotle had some fascinating ideas about the nature of human
behaviour. However, their theories were speculative and unproven. As long as
psychological ideas were untested theories, psychology was not given recognition and
status as a worthy subject.
In 1879 at the University of Leipzig in Germany, an
important development occurred which gave
psychology a new beginning. A German
psychologist named Wilhelm Wundt (pronounced
voont) decided it was time to set up the first real
psychological laboratory so that many of the
thought-provoking theories that had been debated
for years could actually be tested. Moving
psychology into the category of an experimental
science was a very significant step. Establishing a
laboratory to test data led to a major shift in
psychology from merely being a collection of
philosophical ideas, to becoming
an avenue for experimentation and research.
hypothesis – a
sophisticated
hunch  adopted  as
a  tentative
explanation  for  a
situation  which  is
used as the basis
for further
investigation
Wilhelm Wundt
German Psychologist

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
55
55
5
Wundt declared that the main task of psychology was to study the mind. He was interested
in examining the relationship between sensations that a person experiences (like warmness
in temperature, brightness of lighting) and the affect these factors have on judgments the
person makes. Data on the way the senses operate was collected, tested, and published.
Wundt believed that the conscious mind brings together the sensations the person
experiences with the feelings that are aroused through those experiences. Sensations are
external factors from the surroundings; feelings are personal or inner reactions.
Wundt’s psychological laboratory was busy investigating such factors as: sensations,
feelings, attention (awareness of an event), perception (the data one absorbs), reaction time
(responses to an event), and association (similar factors that are grouped together). Wundt’s
laboratory tests, although simple and sometimes incomplete in their thoroughness,
nevertheless attained the objective of giving psychology an acceptance it had not had
before.
Sigmund  Freud:  World  Renown  Psychologist
Sigmund Freud was a brilliant scientist, physician,
psychologist, and psychoanalyst who lived in Vienna,
Austria from 1856 until the onset of World War II. He
has been credited with contributing more to
psychological thought than any other person in the
20th century. His name is easily recognized by the
average person outside the circles of people who work
in the field of psychology.
A few of his basic theories are commonly known to the lay person as well.
Freud wanted to be a scientist, but he needed a substantial salary to support his large family
so he was forced to take up the practice of medicine. As a medical man he was concerned
with the treatment and cure of mental disorders. Freud developed the theory of
psychoanalysis to treat the nervous disorders of his patients. Psychoanalysis is based on the
theory of personality which states that unconscious thoughts and desires determine a
person’s attitudes and behaviours. Psychoanalysis used a variety of valuable techniques to
dig up information from the unconscious mind. This data could then be examined and any
conflicts with the ideas could be resolved, restoring the person’s mental health. This was not
an easy task because many of the conflicts went back to early childhood experiences.
Before we go any further, let’s clarify the terms conscious and unconscious which we
learned earlier in this lesson. We will examine them from Freud’s view. Our conscious
mind is fully aware of the circumstances of our everyday lives and makes important
decisions about appropriate behaviour we should follow. The unconscious mind
contains information, memories, and emotions that we are not aware of but they have a
psychoanalysis –
a  psychological
theory  with
accompanying
treatment used to
assist  people  with
personality
disorders
Sigmund Freud
Psychologist

66
66
6Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
direct affect on our lives just the same. Sometimes the affect of data from the
unconscious mind can be very disturbing. Freud believed that the unconscious mind
was much larger in scope than the conscious mind. To compare the conscious and
unconscious mind, he used the iceberg analogy. Only the tip of the iceberg shows
above the surface of the water; underneath and out of sight is a huge expanse of ice.
That’s what makes an iceberg so dangerous; its great bulk is not visible. Likewise, the
conscious mind represents only a small part of the person as well.
Don’t confuse Freud’s ideas of the unconscious mind with the serious medical
condition of being unconscious or in a coma. Freud believed the mind of every
individual has an unconscious component.
Between the conscious and the unconscious mind was a transition zone known as the
preconscious. Generally a person is not fully aware of information in the preconscious,
but with some effort and concentration, they may be able to become aware of it. For
example, what did you do last Thursday? You may not remember immediately. But if
you are able to work backward day by day, and are given a few clues to help you out,
you might be able to recall a lot of the information. This data is stored in the
preconscious. Sometimes a revelation about some information you have taken for
granted might hit you out of the blue. You realize that you have known that information
for a long time, but you have never taken the care to acknowledge it and examine it.
For example, your little nephew says he doesn’t like playing in the back yard, but
suddenly you realize it is because he is terrified of big dogs and the neighbours own a
large dog. All kinds of data is stored in the preconscious mind, and can be moved into
the conscious mind with a little effort.
preconscious –
the  transition
area between the
conscious  and
unconscious  mind

	General	Psychology	20	Section	One:		Psychology	–	A	Look	Into	The	Past	  7
Now we are faced with a tough question: How can the unconscious mind be 
investigated and treated for mental disorders if we do not understand what is in the 
unconscious mind? One of the first methods Freud used was hypnosis, which is like 
an artificially induced state of sleep in which the person’s eyes are closed and he or 
she is deeply relaxed. In the drowsy state of hypnosis, many forgotten memories come 
back to the person. Another interesting point is that a person usually maintains very 
strict controls on what is remembered or brought into the conscious mind as a means 
of protection from bad memories. However, when the person is relaxed through 
hypnosis, unconscious wishes and memories are more easily brought forward.
Eventually Freud decided to explore other methods for getting to the unconscious 
mind. One technique he encouraged his patients to use was free association. 
This is also known as “talking out” because 
the patient relaxed and discussed personal 
problems while Freud listened and tried to find 
a pattern in what was said. Word association 
is  used by psychologists to get the patient 
through obstacles blocking the memory. The 
psychologist says a series of words and watches 
for unusual responses that indicates problem 
areas. For example, bedtime — punishment 
would be considered an abnormal grouping of 
ideas. Sometimes with free association, Freud 
was able to go back to some of the patient’s 
earliest memories that led him to clues pointing 
to the person’s maladjustments later in life. Free 
association proved to be a useful instrument 
for psychoanalysis or treating disorders of 
the unconscious mind. Freud believed that 
practically all neurotic disturbances had their 
origin in some sexual experience that often 
occurred very early in life, sometimes even in 
infancy.
Freud eventually turned to a third method of gaining information from the 
unconscious mind — dream interpretation. People are usually fascinated with dreams 
and what they may mean, so dreams are the topic of the final, special section of this 
lesson.
Interpretation of Dreams was a popular book written by Freud in 1900. This is 
considered to be one of the great publications of modern times. It is much more than 
just a study of dreams; the book is also about the dynamics of the human mind.
hypnosis – a 
deeply relaxed, 
drowsy state of 
mind in which the 
person is open to 
suggestions
free association 
– a psychological 
technique where 
the person “talks 
out” problems 
with the therapist

88
88
8Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
Why were dreams considered so important? Freud argued that there is a reasonable
cause and a valid explanation for all dreams; they are not just night-time fantasies.
People experience a variety of sensations during the course of their everyday lives such
as pain, noise, cold, and/or hunger. The dream has its origins in the person’s mind,
particularly in the emotions. When the person is in the relaxed state of sleep, all of the
ideas and emotions experienced during the day’s activities are expressed in dreams.
According to Freud, every dream results from an unfulfilled wish of some kind. We do
not always dream what we wish for in a literal or actual sense; rather, our dreams are
usually disguised in some form or another. Dreams are often altered in some way if we
believe our real wishes are either too evil or too naughty to be acceptable to us.
For example, you might get into an argument with a parent or a friend. You feel guilty
about the situation. Since this confrontation is full of emotional turmoil, you may dream
about it. Instead of being angry with the person (in your dreams), you see them caught
up in an embarrassing but harmless situation in order to pay them back for arguing with
you.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
99
99
9
Sigmund  Freud’s  Theories  of  Personality
Besides the study of dreams, Freud made a valuable contribution to the study of human
behaviour by outlining his theory of personality. According to Freud, the total personality has
three main areas: the id, the ego and the superego.
The id is the primary source of psychic energy which gives us our drive to achieve our
goals, to meet our basic needs, and to survive. The id is more closely in touch with the body
and its needs than it is with the outside world. The energy within the id which is the life
instincts or the forces which drive a person to fill positive stimulation is the libido. The libido
focuses on the pleasure principle to reduce tension in our lives and give us satisfaction
through basic body requirements like eating, eliminating body wastes, and sexual
gratification.
The id is both powerful and
impulsive in nature. For
example, you may observe the
behaviour of a young child who
wants a candy or a cookie. The
infant will reach out for it and
cry if the treat is not given
immediately. The id is strongly
asserting its demands. As the
individual matures and the
personality develops, some of
the energy originating in the id
is diverted into the two other
systems of the personality–the
ego and superego.
The ego controls and governs the id and the superego. It is the mediator or the go-between
whose goal is the smooth functioning of all parts of the personality. Using thought and
reason, the ego develops a plan of action with the best interests of the total personality in
mind. The ego not only attempts to balance the demands of the id and superego, but also
takes into account the realities of the external world. For example, you are hungry and pass
through the candy section of your grocery store. The id says: “Buy a chocolate bar and eat
it now; they taste delicious.” The superego or your conscience says: “Remember you’re on
a diet and you promised yourself you wouldn’t break it.” While this argument is going on
within your body and mind, you note the facts of external reality: It is an hour and a half
before supper which is a long time to wait, yet you don’t want to spoil your appetite. The
ego sorts through all this data and comes up with a solution: Buy some sweet grapes which
will satisfy your hunger cravings without doing a lot of damage. Maybe from that simple
example you can appreciate the work of the ego.
id – the part of
the  personality
which focuses on
satisfying  basic
needs  and
receiving
pleasure
libido –  the
energy  within  the
id which gives
attention  to  the
goals  of  attaining
pleasure
ego – the part of
the  personality
which acts as the
mediator  between
the id, superego,
and  external
reality

1010
1010
1 0Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
The superego is much the same as our conscience, telling us what is right and wrong.
The superego strives for perfection or the ideal type of behaviour. During Freud’s time,
many people believed the conscience was implanted by God. Freud argued that the
superego forms around the ideas that one’s parents consider to be morally good and
bad. There are two very strong forces at
work urging the person to behave in a
certain way. One is fear of punishment
for “bad” behaviour and the other is
desire to gain approval for “good”
behaviour. For example, the young child
remembers that Mommy gets upset when
she pulls up flowers from the garden.
Even though the flowers are very pretty
and she is tempted to pick them, her
superego reminds her not to do this. The
superego’s purpose is to regulate and
control impulses that could be dangerous
to society. You can probably think of
some examples of the safeguards that the
superego provides for the safety of all
citizens. People who engage in horrible
crimes have a superego that isn’t
functioning or perhaps it does not exist at
all for that person.
When a person is young, all parts of the personality—the id, ego, and superego—are
struggling for control. As a person becomes older, the three parts of the personality work
together more smoothly as a team and become more integrated. Each part of the personality
is important and has a critical job to do to make the individual a well adjusted member of
society.
In summary, Freud wrote extensively on dreams, the personality, stages of human
development and defense mechanisms which will be one of the topics later in this
course. Without covering all of Freud’s theories, the ones we have chosen give a clear
indication of the magnitude of Freud’s contribution in the field of psychology.
id
ego
superego
superego – the
part of the
personality  which
gives moral
direction  to  the
person like the
conscience

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
1111
1111
11
Are  You  an  Extravert  or  Introvert?
A Swiss psychiatrist, Carl Jung, was an associate of Sigmund Freud at one time. They
parted company because of certain disagreements over key theories. He popularized the
terms extravert and introvert. Let’s pause to talk about a few of the characteristics
associated with each term.
Extravert — social, outgoing, gregarious, “the life
of the party”
When stress occurs, the extravert automatically
turns to others for support. The extravert laughs
frequently and finds it easy to make friends. Given
the choice of presenting an oral report in front
of the class or focusing on a detailed written
report, the extravert has no hesitation in
choosing the oral report.
Introvert — thoughtful, shy ,withdrawn, caught
up in self discovery and personal growth
When stress occurs, the introvert finds a place
away from others to think things through. The
introvert tends to daydream, worries about the
opinions of others and is easily hurt by the rude
actions of others. The introvert may enjoy
reading a book or listening to music alone.
Many people say, “I’m a little bit of both”. This is usually true. On some occasions a
person wants to be with others and have fun; at other times the person doesn’t mind
having some quiet time. However, Carl Jung maintained that when one of the choices
becomes dominant and habitual for the person, they are either an extravert or an
introvert. Nine times out of ten, would you rather read a book or be the life of the
party? Which choices tend to be more dominant (that’s the key word)? Those people
who are truly a balance of both choices are call ambiverts.
Like Freud, Jung spent a great deal of time studying the unconscious mind. However
these great psychologists had differing views on the factors that determine human
behaviour. Freud narrowed it down to early childhood experiences. Jung emphasized
that goals play an important role in directing human behaviour.
extravert – a
person who is self
confident,  people-
oriented,
outgoing
introvert – a
person who is
quiet,  thoughtful,
inner-directed

1212
1212
1 2Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
Jung believed the unconscious mind could be divided into the personal unconscious
and the collective unconscious. The personal unconscious comes from our own past
experiences that we were once aware of, but have now been forgotten. For example,
any basic habit you learned in early childhood has now become automatic for you to do and
you don’t have to consciously remember it step by step every time you do it. One example
would be brushing your hair.
The collective unconscious is the second category. This is a powerful region of the
mind and contains all the memories from our earliest ancestors. The collective
unconscious is the same for everyone throughout the world; it is universal. The
collective unconscious refers to human understandings common to all mankind because
of our similar experiences. For example, people from all corners of the world would be
afraid of a loud thundering noise and a sudden flash of intense light because that
usually means personal danger. It is also interesting to note that many cultures around
the world have similar myths and stories. One lady working with a group of Caribbean
natives, as well as a group of Inuit people in the north, discovered they had an
interesting and unusual myth about the moon, and both stories were almost identical.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
1313
1313
13
Behaviourism
Freud and Jung were two important European psychologists. In America there were
many scientists who were dissatisfied with the general aims and methods of psychology.
They had little faith in the methods used by psychoanalytic psychologists involving the
gathering of data through hypnosis, dream interpretation, and asking patients to reflect on
their early childhood experiences. They believed the importance of the unconscious mind
had been greatly exaggerated.
The Behaviourist believed that a person’s inner feelings and attitudes can only be
known to the individual in a personal way. They believed the only elements about the
individual that can be known by the scientists conducting studies is the person’s
outward behaviour which can be accurately measured and observed. Therefore the
Behaviourist wanted to focus on behaviour and not one’s inner feelings and memories.
They believed that was the precise, scientific way of studying psychology.
Let’s look at an example to distinguish the approaches used by a psychoanalytic or
Freudian psychologist and a Behaviourist. The psychologist wants to study the emotion
of fear. For example, the Freudian would attempt to discover what original childhood
experience initiated the fear and how it is associated with present day experiences. For
example, the Behaviourist would be concerned with measuring body reactions when
the emotion of fear is present such as: increased pulse rate, muscle tension, and to what
extent the person perspires. The Behaviourist would not give a subjective report on
how an individual actually feels when afraid. In other words, the Behaviourist would
simply study behaviour in a clinical, scientific way. The Behaviourist avoids the use of
the word mind as much as possible.

1414
1414
1 4Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
What causes people to behave as they do?
According to the Behaviourist, a great deal
of a youngster’s actions are shaped by the
behaviour of those around him. The child
often imitates the actions of others. The
youngster will then decide whether these
responses will become a permanent part of
the child’s approach to life depending on
whether there is a reward or punishment for
such behaviour. Therefore a person is
programmed by environmental forces. If a
reward is offered repeatedly for a behaviour,
the individual will retain that response. If
punishment is used, the person will quickly
abandon the behaviour that leads to
punishment. For example, we often see
these Behaviourist principles in use when
someone is training an animal by offering a
reward or intervening with punishment
depending on the behaviour.
Rewards and punishments people give to each other are not always something obvious
like money and gifts or a slap or scolding. A subtle yet powerful reward is a smile or a
nod; a frown or complete silence are subtle forms of punishment. The next time you
encounter a long-winded companion, remain perfectly silent for one full minute and
observe how this will alter the person’s behaviour.
Some critics believed that the methods of the Behaviourist leaned so strongly on
physiology that their approach could hardly be classified as psychological. But the
Behaviourist has made significant contributions to child psychology and the study of
learning.
John Watson was an early leader in Behaviourist movement in psychology. He was an
extreme environmentalist which means he believed that human character, ability and
intelligence are an outcome of our circumstances in life. Human character is not inborn
or innate. This notion is linked to the tabula rasa theory that the human being is a
blank or clean slate at birth until we begin recording our life experiences. Another
comparison is that we are like an unused videotape when we are first born until we
begin noticing and recording what is happening to us.
tabula rasa – the
theory that a
newborn  baby  has
no  previous
thoughts  or
experiences  prior
to  birth

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
1515
1515
15
What were some of Watson’s other theories? He stated that human beings have no
instincts and no inherited temperaments or talents. There are only three innate or inborn
emotional responses— fear, rage, and love. Other emotions are conditioned responses,
that is, these emotions have been learned by programming the individual. Our habits are
learned through conditioning and so is our speech which is the basis of our thinking.
The combination of all of the individual’s habits leads to personality.
One of Watson’s key concepts was that behaviour was formed by the S-R or stimulus-
response connection. An individual is exposed to a certain stimulus and responds with
certain muscular contractions or glandular discharges. For example, when driving a car
you come to an intersection with a red light (stimulus). Your automatic reaction is to
take your foot off the gas and put it on the brake (response).
In 1920 John B. Watson conducted an interesting experiment with a little boy named Albert,
a white rat, and a loud noise. Albert was a little boy who had no fear of most things in his
environment. Watson wanted to find out if fears were learnable instead of being instinctive
as was traditionally thought. Albert was allowed to play with a variety of objects and
animals (the white rat, a dog, wool, etc....) and he had no fear or adverse reactions to
any of them. Watson then hit a steel bar whenever Albert would reach out to pet the rat.
This startled Albert who began to cry (loud noises are often associated with danger).
From then on the loud noise was paired with the white rat and Albert always had a
strong negative response. Eventually, the white rat was able to elicit a negative response
from Albert even without the loud noise. Watson then introduced other objects. Albert
did not cry when blocks or rubber balls were placed in front of him but Albert did cry
when he saw a white rabbit. In fact, Albert generalized his fear to many white furry
objects including white fur coats, cotton wool, and even a Santa Claus beard.
In a way the experiment was a success because Watson had successfully demonstrated that
fears could be conditioned or learned. On the day Watson was to attempt to “undo” the
learned fear of white furry objects, Albert was taken from the hospital. We know now
that conditioning principles can be used to remove conditioned fears but we do not
know what became of poor Albert.
Besides his work with little Albert, Watson was
involved in other experimental studies with
children. Watson was soon regarded as an
expert on child rearing and child care. His
advice was sought by many parents. Because of
his Behaviourist philosophy on programming
behaviour, he had rather strict and disciplined
views on child care.

1616
1616
1 6Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
Humanistic  Theories
The psychologists in this group believed that under the right circumstances people will
become happy, creative individuals who seek growth experiences. People are not evil by
nature, the Humanists stated. Our inner nature is good and pulls us toward positive
experiences that help us to meet our needs and improve our own lives and those of others.
One very popular psychologist in the Humanistic field was Abraham Maslow. According
to Maslow, each person follows an identical blueprint or pattern in order to satisfy physical
and psychological needs. He arranged human needs in a pyramid shape because the lowest
sections of the pyramid contain needs required by every human being in order to survive.
Each category of needs becomes more difficult to attain, but at the same time it is more
satisfying from the standpoint of personal growth. The needs at the bottom of the pyramid
(food, water, air, warmth) are physiological needs that focus on the comfort and survival of
the body. The lower needs must be satisfied first to some degree before the person can
focus attention on the satisfaction of the next needs on the list.
Every human being has the same built-in pattern that is followed to satisfy needs. There
are two important principles to remember when studying the pyramid. First, each need
does not have to be satisfied 100% before a person becomes challenged by the next
level of needs. For example, a person requires food for survival before thinking of
safety and security. The individual can still be a little hungry, but be on the lookout for
ways to meet security or even belonging needs. A second principle is that each person
has a different threshold or capacity before deciding the particular need has been
satisfied. For example, one individual might need a great deal of love and reassurances
from family and friends before the need for social approval is satisfactorily fulfilled.
The next person may be very independent requiring very little approval from others to
satisfy social needs.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
1717
1717
17
Maslow’s pyramid is sometimes referred to the hierarchy of needs because people progress
from one level of needs to the next in a predictable, orderly fashion. A person cannot decide
to select a level at random and concentrate on those needs before looking after the needs at
the lower levels; more basic needs must be satisfied first, at least to some degree. Most of
the categories in Maslow’s pyramid are fairly self-explanatory except for self-
actualization. The term means total fulfillment as a human being; being aware of one’s
potential and goals and reaching out to satisfy them. Self-actualization means using your
talents and feeling good about yourself. It means seeing yourself as a good, honest person
who has compassion for others. It means having a desire to learn and understand new ideas
just for the satisfaction it brings. Self-actualization means enjoying and cultivating beauty in
our surroundings (aesthetic needs).
Maslow spoke of self-actualization in glowing terms using some of these descriptions:
honesty, truth, beauty, uniqueness, humour, justice, fairness, gaiety, benevolence,
individuality, exuberance, spontaneity, and self determination. Unfortunately, not every
person will experience the joy of self-actualization. Other people will reach self-
actualization only for a certain short period of their lives. What well known people are
thought to have been self-actualizing? A few examples are: Mother Theresa, Terry Fox,
and Mahatma Gandhi. But a self-actualizing person can also be your father, your aunt,
or one of your close friends who has high principles and the strong will to make life
better for themselves and for others.
self-actualization
–  total  fulfillment
as a human being
MASLOW'S
Hierarchy of Needs
Self-
Actualization
individuality
perfection
self-sufficiency
Aesthetic Needs
meaningfulne
ss
goodness
justice
richness
Cognitive Needs
knowledge
symmetry
self esteem
esteem from others
Esteem Needs
Belongingness & Love Needs
acceptance
affection
Safety Needs
security
Physiological Needs
foodairwater
truthorderbeauty
Growth Needs
(also called
Higher needs)
Basic Needs
(also called
Deficit Needs)

1818
1818
1 8Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
Another Humanistic psychologist who deserves mention is Carl Rogers. He believed
people have the power to form their own identity and not be shaped by the outside
influences and expectations of others. One of the key ideas in Carl Rogers’ theory was the
self-concept. The self concept involves the attitudes and opinions people form about
themselves. Personal feelings and emotions are also part of the self-concept. The self-
concept has so much influence that a person tends to behave in ways that agree with the
self-concept. What happens when one’s self-concept is out of tune with reality? One
solution is to look for an excuse to explain the difference. Another is to alter your self-
concept so it is more in tune with the facts. Will the self-concept change? Hopefully it will as
the person matures, has new experiences, undergoes physical changes with age, and
develops new knowledge. The ideal situation is to have a self-concept that is both positive
and at the same time realistic.
The Eclectic View
Which school of thought in psychology have you decided makes the most sense? That
might be a difficult choice. Some people feel more comfortable with an eclectic
approach. What does that mean? The eclectic approach to forming a theory involves
selecting what is perceived to be the best ideas and doctrines from a variety of sources.
But the eclectic process is not a haphazard one whereby incompatible ideas are
aimlessly picked from here and there and are thrown together. Facts favouring a certain
set of principles may be chosen, and contradictory material will not be accepted so that
the final result is an orderly and unified theory. One of the main values of eclecticism is
that it fosters a flexible and open-minded approach to new ideas. The eclectic view
allows a person to review and modify the principles and facts of the theory they have
chosen in light of new evidence.
Sleep  and  Dreams
Many hours of our lives are spent sleeping. It is much more than just a passive activity
we engage in once a day. Sleep might be boring, but the dreams we have while
sleeping certainly aren’t! Freud found them amazing, and that interest continues.
self-concept – the
attitudes  and
impressions the
individual  has  of
himself or herself
eclectic  approach
–  an  approach
that  involves
selecting what is
perceived to be
the best ideas and
doctrines from a
variety of services

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
1919
1919
19
Sleep
Do people really need 8 hours of sleep a night? Some do need that length of time;
others can get by on 5 or 6 hours, while some people require as much as 9 or 10 hours.
Why is sleep necessary? One research compared
the brain to a computer which stores our
memory banks. Computers need to be shut
down or taken “off line” occasionally
and so does the brain in order to sort
through the events of the day and
recharge the memory banks. Studies
of the brain indicate that while a
person is awake, many nerve
impulses pass continuously through
the nervous system. When the person
is asleep, far fewer impulses are
recorded. Sleep helps the body build
resistance to stress and strengthens the
immune system. Lack of sleep can lead to a
number of consequences including: anxiety,
depression, problems with concentration and
memory, poor performance at tasks, accidents, increased
illness, and even personality disturbances.
Sleep may seem like an uneventful process where nothing happens, however, people
do not sleep uninterruptedly throughout the night. Psychologists speak of five stages of
sleep. Sleep occurs in cycles, but the pattern of these cycles varies not only for the same
individual from one night to the next, but also from one individual to another.  These
stages can be characterized as follows:
•Stage one:  also characterized as light sleep this is the stage where a person drifts
in and out of sleep and can be awakened quite easily.  Eye movement slows
down and muscles start to relax.  Some people awakened during this stage can
recall seeing some images. Many also experience sudden muscle contractions
accompanied by the feeling that they are falling.  Their bodies start or make a
jump, waking the person up.
•Stage two:  during this stage our eye movements stop and our brain waves show
a pattern that is much slower than when we are awake.  Occasionally a rapid, fast
burst of brainwave activity will occur for a brief period of time.

2020
2020
2 0Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
•Stage three:  (sometimes referred to as deep sleep) During this stage our brain
waves become even slower and a pattern of delta waves occur with the
occasional burst of smaller, faster waves.  During this stage people are very
difficult to wake up.  When they are awakened, they feel disoriented and groggy.
They show no eye movement or muscle activity.  This is the stage when people
experience night terrors, bed-wetting and sleep walking.
•Stage four:  (also sometimes referred to as deep sleep) During this stage the brain
produces delta waves almost exclusively.  All the effects that occur during stage
three occur during this stage as well; the only difference is the absence of the fast
bursts of waves.
•REM sleep (Stage five):  during this stage our body functions speed up.  Our
breathing becomes more rapid, irregular, and shallow, and our eyes move around
rapidly in all directions.  Our arm and leg muscles become paralyzed, and our
heart rate increases, and our blood pressure rises.  This is the stage where
dreaming occurs.  The amount of time a person spends in REM sleep depends on
the person’s age.  A baby spends 50% of its sleep in REM sleep, a young adult
spends 20% of sleep time in REM sleep and a elderly person spends 15% of sleep
time in REM sleep.
Many individuals suffer from sleep disorders.  For example, there are more than 80
different sleep-wake disorders under the broad heading insomnia.  There are almost as
many different remedies to correct it.
Here are a few common-sense tips:
•   try to retain a similar sleep pattern on the weekend as you do throughout the
week
•   drink a glass of milk; it contains tryptophan, a substance to promote sleep
•   if you can’t fall asleep within 15 minutes of going to bed, get up and do
something until you are more tired or more relaxed
•   learn to relax at bedtime; meditate or listen to “sleep tapes”
•   don’t get into the habit of taking medication to help you sleep; drugs cause a
person to fall into a deep, unnatural sleep without dreaming
•   if problems persist, keep a sleep diary recording times you go to bed, wake up,
and catnaps you take during the day
insomnia – the
inability  to  fall
asleep

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The Past
2121
2121
21
Sweet Dreams
People need to dream. Sleep researchers tell us that
during dream sleep the brain restores a chemical
depleted during the day which we need to focus our
attention and to think logically. It has been found
that those deprived of dreams have temporary
changes in behaviour during the waking hours, such
as greater irritability, difficulty in concentrating, and
some memory lapses. These changes disappear
when the subjects are allowed to sleep undisturbed,
during which time they dream more frequently.
How do you know when a sleeping person is having dreams? If you closely observe a
person in the deeper sleep cycles, you may notice their eyes are fluttering and moving from
side to side. This phenomenon is known as rapid eye movements or REMs. The average
dream is about 25 minutes in length. Dreams can be as short as a few minutes or last for
over an hour. Some people say they don’t dream at all which means they don’t remember
their dreams. People are sometimes disturbed or even embarrassed by their dreams.
Most people will admit that even though dreams vary greatly from one episode to the
next, they have a recurring dream that repeats itself from time to time.
Sigmund Freud called dreams the royal road to the unconscious mind. Carl Jung
believed that dreams speak to us through the symbols they portray. Some people
attempt to advise a person what each dream event or dream symbol means. However, it
is best to remember that your dreams are your unconscious mind speaking to you.
Therefore, if you want to gain a clear understanding of what your dreams mean, you
will have to learn to interpret your own dream symbols that relate to your own personal
life situation. Many people believe dreams are just a lot of nonsense images that flicker
across your mind during sleep. But if you want to gain a better understanding of your
dreams, here are some tips:
•   before you go to sleep, spend a couple of minutes thinking about dreams and tell
yourself you want to remember them
•   keep a notebook close to your bed, and record what you remember of your
dreams as soon as you awake (delays mean you will forget them)
•   record the date of each dream
•   describe your feelings and the emotions of others in the dream; often while in the
process of writing down a dream sequence, a flash of insight occurs and you will
recognize the significance of the message
•   watch for repetitions in the material which may indicate an important idea for you
to recognize and accept
•   the more you practise dream remembrance and analysis, the more comfortable
and competent you will become in deciphering the rich material of your dreams!

2222
2222
2 2Section One:  Psychology ñ A Look Into The PastADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
Summary
So Lesson 1 draws to a close. Were you overwhelmed by the amount of material and
the number of different ideas presented? Don’t dismay! You will likely find future
lessons less hectic. If you have managed to understand the main ideas in the lesson
notes and are ready to tackle some assignments, congratulations on your endurance!
To summarize:
•   Psychology is the science of human behaviour.
•   The goals of psychology are to observe and record facts, to explain data,
and to make reasonable predictions about future behaviour.
•   The first laboratory started by Wilhelm Wundt gave psychology status and
recognition as a science.
•   Sigmund Freud recognized the importance of the unconscious mind and
studied it through hypnosis, free association, and dream interpretation.
•   Freud believed the personality was composed of three main areas—the id,
the ego, and the superego.
•   Carl Jung popularized the terms introvert and extravert; he believed
people have both a personal and a collective unconscious.
•   The Behaviourists believed it was only valid to measure outward,
observable behaviour; a person is programmed by responding to a certain
stimulus.
•   Abraham Maslow was a Humanist who described a pyramid of human
needs.
•   An eclectic view takes bits and pieces from a number of theories.
•   Sleep and dreams are both important in order to be healthy.
A
Turn to Assignment Booklet 1 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
2323
2323
23
SS
SS
S
22
22
2
SS
SS
S
ECTIONECTION
ECTIONECTION
ECTION
TT
TT
T
WOWO
WOWO
WO
Learning and Cognitive Processes
Lesson 1: The Principles of Learning
Overview
You have been learning all your life–since the moment you were born. So what’s there
to find out about learning?
Lesson 1 will focus on these topics:
•   What is Learning?
•   Learning Begin With Me – Self-concept, Motivation, and Attitudes
•   The Process of Learning
•   Significant Factors in Learning
•   Basic Principles of Efficient Learning
•   The Power of Personal Learning Styles
•   Human Development: What is Learning? What is Maturation?
•   The Basic Theories of Piaget
•   A Mixture of Reinforcement, Reward and Punishment
•   Classical Conditioning and Operant Conditioning
•   Mind Mapping Skills
•   A Road Map to Improve Your Reading
•   Efficiency Begins With Your Own Study Habits
•   Top Students Reveal These Secrets To Success

2424
2424
2 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
What  is  Learning?
Human beings are born learners. Learning begins as soon as the newborn enters our
fascinating new world and continues until death ends the learning process. The road to
learning may bring joy or even ecstasy. On the other hand, learning may be marked with
confusion, pain and hard work.
Learning, then, forms a tremendous part of our lives. Let’s define what is not considered
learning. Reflex is a behaviour that is not learned. It is a simple automatic response
involving a part of the body. A reflex action does not require previous learning or practise.
For example, a reflex action is the response of a baby curling and unclenching its hand.
Another example of a reflex action is putting out one’s hands to break the impact of a fall.
Let’s get back to the question: What is learning? Learning means acquiring the ability to
respond in a competent manner to a situation. When learning occurs, our behaviour is
modified through experience. Learning involves mastering information or skills that will help
us react successfully to our environment. Learning begins with something human beings have
in abundance when they are born—curiosity. Learning means gathering information from
family members, friends, music, and movies. That is informal learning. Most people think of
formal learning situations when learning is mentioned. Formal learning comes to us through
reading books, listening to classroom lectures, watching documentary videos, or taking
tennis lessons from a qualified instructor.
There are three broad categories of learning.
Perceptual motor learning involves the acquisition
of physical skills like riding a bicycle, going downhill
on skis, or doing a somersault. An individual must do
two things in this learning situation—accurately
perceive the skill, and implement the action that is
required. For example, to tie a bow, you must be able
to see the series of hand movements involved, and
then get your own hands to follow the correct
movement pattern. The second type of learning is
affective learning which involves feelings and
emotions. Our values, biases, likes, dislikes, social
rules, and appropriate ways of behaving toward others
are all included. Affective learning is a vital part of our
humanness and our sociability. Cognitive learning is
school learning. It covers thinking, problem solving
and other creative processes of the mind.
reflex – a
response  that
occurs
automatically
without  any
learning
learning –
mastering
information  or
skills  that
increase one’s
competence
informal learning
–  gathering
information
through  contacts
with others,
leisure interests
formal learning –
gathering
information
through  school
studies  and  other
structured
lectures
perceptual
learning –
acquiring
physical  skills
affective learning
–  gaining  an
understanding
about  feelings
and  emotions
cognitive
learning –
thinking,  problem
solving,  and
processing
information  in
creative ways

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
2525
2525
25
From birth onward, much of our education involves learning to adapt ourselves to our
particular environment. First, we must learn to adapt our behaviour to be acceptable to our
parents and family members. In time, we learn the important lessons of adjusting our
behaviour to fit the expectations of a wide circle of family, friends and acquaintances in our
society.
Learning involves a number of complex processes that occur to make both knowledge
and skills remembered and stored in our brains. But learning also involves an impetus
from the learner to engage in the fascinating process of learning. Let’s begin with the
learner. How is a learner “created”?
Learning  Begins  With  Me  –  Self-Concept,  Motivation,  &  Attitudes
Self-Concept
How well we learn depends a great deal on our self-concept. We evaluate the world
and its meaning in terms of how we see ourselves. We try to behave in a manner which
is consistent with the way we view ourselves. Studies have shown that students who
receive good grades and who are successful all-round students are those who have
confidence in their overall ability and in their ability as students. Such students have a
positive self-concept. They require fewer favourable evaluations from others since they
know their own worth as individual human beings.
Unsuccessful students have negative attitudes about themselves. They see themselves
as less able, less adequate and less self-reliant than their successful peers. Since they see
themselves as inferior, they believe that others regard them in the same manner. Many
students feel separated from society. Therefore, they do poorly in school because they
feel school is irrelevant to their needs. Many young people are handicapped throughout
their lives by feelings of inferiority that they picked up in their learning experiences.
This negative self-concept can strongly influence everything they ever attempt. Thus
our capacity for learning is affected by our knowledge of our personalities, our abilities,
and our limitations.
+++ Motivation === The Learner
Knowledge
Skills
Processes
Abilities
positive self-
concept –  having
a  confident,
successful image
of  oneself
negative self-
concept  –  having
feelings  of
inferiority  and
self  doubt  about
abilities

2626
2626
2 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
While we can appreciate the fact that humans are greatly influenced by the emotional
tone of the learning situation, so are animals! An experiment conducted on a group of
rats brought to light some startling results. It is important to remember that all rats in the
experiment were of average intelligence and ability. First the rats were randomly
divided into two groups. The experimenters were told that one group of rats were
exceptionally intelligent and superior. They were instructed that the other rats were dull
and stupid. The rats that were labelled superior were handled and responded to as if
they were special. These rats showed superior ability in the tests that were conducted.
In contrast, the rats that had been labelled stupid did very poorly. The manner in which
the rats were handled made quite a difference in the amount of learning accomplished
in each group. Thus the process of labelling established far different expectations for
the two groups with correspondingly different results. What implications does this have
for parents, teachers, bosses, and anyone else who guides, directs, and inspires the
actions of others?
Motivation
Motivation is concerned with the why of behaviour.
It is a complex topic, but the key question relating to
motivation is, “What’s in it for me?” Educators are
especially interested in the motivational aspect of
learning. If a teacher understands why students
learn, this knowledge can be used to motivate the
students toward greater learning. Generally
speaking, we learn best when:
•   we are interested
•   we have the desire and intention to learn
•   the material is meaningful to us
•   we can relate and apply the material to our
own lives
Thus motivation is one of the most important keys to learning. It is doubtful if we
would learn unless we are impelled by a need, or faced with a problem, or lured by a
reward. Moreover, increasing the motivation usually enhances the learning. If we are
not “naturally” motivated to participate in some activity, the motivation or interest must
be created. You become an active learner in your search for knowledge which gives
you personal power in a number of ways. You now have energy to meet many new
challenges in your life.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
2727
2727
27
Attitudes
When you are faced with the challenge of learning new information, your most
valuable asset for success is a positive attitude. The attitudes we acquire through
childhood experiences have a strong effect on our behaviours throughout life. Early
experiences influence and determine how later experiences will be interpreted. The
direct and subtle messages we get from our family about what we can and can’t
accomplish are the foundation for establishing attitudes.
When we enter school we formally learn subject matter. However, the attitudes which
we have learned informally will have a far more lasting influence. The biggest barrier to
progress is fear of failure, embarrassment, and rejection.
Thinking like a winner makes a person a winner. You can overcome many of the
barriers you face by providing yourself with positive messages. Self-talk (which means
silently coaching yourself) can help you accomplish many tasks that you initially
thought were impossible. Before you were three years old, you succeeded in doing two
of the most difficult tasks you will ever face—walking and talking. If you watch young
children tackle both of those jobs, you will see that small failures, like falling down
don’t stop them for a minute.
We may not have control over every learning situation we enter, but we can make a
conscious decision about whether we are going to think about it positively or
negatively. That decision will determine the outcome more than almost any factor.

2828
2828
2 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
saturation –
being  completely
full,  unable  to
hold any more
The  Process  of  Learning
Learning progress is slow at first because the learner is just entering a new area of skills and
concepts. You can certainly identify with that notion when you think back to the first time
you attempted a skill or began studying a new topic. You may have been afraid, bewildered,
and frustrated all at the same time.
Then the rate of learning speeds up as the learner gets comfortable with the learning
material. Finally, the learning process slows down when the learner reaches mastery;
previous learning is consolidated and refined in the final stage. The learner reaches a point of
saturation after absorbing a great deal of content on a particular topic. They become very
knowledgeable.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
2929
2929
29
plateau – a
period of little or
no progress in
learning
Productivity
Weeks of Production
Plateau
A Learning Plateau
Information Learned
Practice Time
A General Learning Curve
The  Learning  Curve  and  Plateaus
Graphs show that one’s progress in learning can be quite irregular. On a certain day an
individual might not have a good learning record for a variety of reasons. The learning path
itself is not smooth. Some concepts make connections quickly and smoothly, others take
longer. Sometimes the learner may not be able to give full concentration to the material at
hand for one reason or another. A plateau is a period of little or no noticeable progress in
learning. A great deal of learning may occur both before and after the plateau. Plateaus are
temporary standstills in the learning process. Sometimes a rest period may be helpful. A
person may forget bad habits after taking a break from the learning material. A plateau can
be the stepping stone to future learning.
Plateaus occur for a number of reasons. The learner becomes bored or loses interest after
the initial excitement of a new topic. The learner may make a change in the earlier work or
study procedures which may cause them to lose ground in learning progress for a while. If a
learner does not have a good background in the original concepts, a plateau will likely
occur. Anxiety in the learning situation will cause tension which may lead to a plateau.

3030
3030
3 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
transfer – the
affect  of  previous
learning  on  later
learning  or
performance
positive transfer –
prior learning is
helpful  to
learning  that
occurs later
Significant  Factors  in  Learning
Efficiency is certainly a familiar theme in our lives. Listen to these words of wisdom.
A stitch in time saves nine.
A penny saved is a penny earned.
Waste not, want not.
Learning is a complex task and there are a number of variables interacting with each
other all at once. An understanding of key learning components gives you, the student,
an opportunity to use them to your advantage. Learning efficiency should be a special
concern of every student. Efficiency means better results with less effort. Who wants to
spend hour upon hour studying when one can economize? Let’s take a closer look at
some of the components in the learning process.
Transfer
Transfer has definite value in learning efficiently. Will
learning in one area transfer to learning in other topics?
Transfer means the effect of previous learning on
later learning or performance. If the prior learning is
helpful to later learning, positive transfer has
occurred. For example, Heidi learned proper
typing skills on an electric typewriter Later Heidi did
a computer program and had to type certain commands and
responses on the keyboard. Her earlier learning in typing classes was helpful.
A special kind of positive transfer is simulation. A simulation is an imitation of a
certain exercise or set of skills that is very similar in nature to a real life situation. Real
life conditions are duplicated to give the individual close to first-hand experience.
Simulations are used for the purpose of training or experimentation. For example, in
prenatal classes Mr. and Mrs. Leiberg learned how to handle, bath, feed and diaper a
life-sized doll so they will be prepared to care for their own baby when it arrives.
Another example: the astronauts simulate their space procedures by working with
training materials and shuttle control panels before they are launched into space.
Transfer occurs because of close associations between stimuli
and responses. As stimuli become more and more similar to
each other, the amount of transfer will increase. For example,
if you have a certain kind of computer at home and one that is
very similar at school or work, then you will have little
trouble in changing from one to the other. Transfer will be
high. The highest positive transfer occurs when stimuli and
responses of two tasks or situations are identical.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
3131
3131
31
negative transfer
– prior learning
interferes  with
learning  that
occurs later
overlearning –
continued
learning  until
complete mastery
of the material
occurs
diminishing
returns – extra
study time does
not  produce  extra
gains  in  learning
massed practice –
learning  sessions
that occur in one
entire unit of time
But all is not positive when it comes to transfer. If the prior learning interferes with later
learning, negative transfer has occurred. For example, Mario learned to drive a car
with an automatic gear shift. Then he was in a situation where he had to drive his
brother’s truck with a standard, on-the-floor gear shift. He had trouble learning how to
get the truck moving smoothly and shift gears using a clutch. This is an example of
negative transfer.
Overlearning
When we have learned a skill or a piece of information
but continue to practise until we acquire complete
mastery, we are overlearning. Overlearning has both
advantages and disadvantages. If we simply learn
something to the point where we barely know it, rapid
forgetting will occur. The reason for that happening is that
the information is not firmly anchored in the memory.
That’s what happens when students “cram” just before an
exam. For example, you may have learned a poem just in
time for the school concert. One month later you cannot
remember most of the lines because you did not overlearn
the material. So an advantage of using overlearning is that
the learner masters the material.
However, at a certain point, overlearning reaches a maximum when the learner can
understand and explain the material without mistakes or hesitations. Once the learner
knows the material thoroughly, any extra time spent reviewing this body of knowledge
is time wasted. A name for this situation is diminishing returns. Extra studying does
not lead to extra gains in learning. For example, if a high school math teacher decided
to review the addition of whole numbers, that lesson would involve overlearning
because students would be bored with a presentation of information that is very familiar
to them.
Massed and Distributed Practice
As the name suggests, massed practice refers to practice sessions in a learning
situation that occur in one great, ongoing mass of time. Massed practice allows the
learner to be exposed to the entire unit of learning at one time. In complex learning
where seeing relationships is important, massed practice will have a real advantage.

3232
3232
3 2Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
distributed
practice –
learning  sessions
separated by rest
periods
Massed practice also has some disadvantages. Efficiency will decline as the learner
becomes fatigued after a certain time. Also, the learner may become bored after a long
session. If the material is very complex or there is too much material, then massed practice
cannot be used because the learner would be too overwhelmed with data. An example of a
massed practice session would be taking a one-day seminar or a nonstop weekend
workshop on a particular topic.
Distributed practice involves a type of learning schedule in which sessions are separated
by rest periods. Distributed practice is most useful when the learner must make use of
physical skills or motor skills. Distributed practice allows the individual to master learning in
a small area of a skill. This gives confidence and motivation to conquer another area of skills
in a subsequent distributed practice.
One disadvantage may be that forgetting of previously learned material will sometimes occur
between sessions. If practice sessions are spaced over an extended period of time, the
learner may become bored because of repetition and overlap. For example, if an individual
takes tennis lessons twice a week over a ten week period, that person is learning through
distributed practice.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
3333
3333
33
serial learning –
material is
learned in a
definite order or
sequence
primacy effect –
first items in the
learning  sequence
are remembered
most clearly
recency effect –
last items in the
learning  sequence
are remembered
best
Serial Learning
Serial learning refers to the situation where the individual learns a series of responses
in a definite order or sequence. When the individual masters the serial learning material,
then each item becomes a connection or a stimulus for the appearance of the next item
because the items are arranged in a prescribed sequence. The first and last items in the
series are learned more easily because they occupy a special position.
The primacy effect refers to the fact that the first few items are learned the most
thoroughly. This is also linked to the idea that first impressions of something have quite a
dramatic impact.
The recency effect means the last items on the list are the next easiest to learn. For
example, we can remember the last task we had to do when cleaning the house or the
garage. We have the best recall of the last science definition we learned.
The remainder of the items in the middle of the series are learned with the greatest difficulty
of all. They seem to have no special significance. It may be wise to keep this information in
mind the next time you are scheduled for a job interview. If you have a choice, try to get the
first or the final interview.

3434
3434
3 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
mnemonic devices
– memory aids
like jingles or
catchwords
latent learning –
learning  that
takes  place
without  full
awareness that is
happening
Mnemonic Devices
Mnemonic devices are memory aids that help the learner remember certain facts. They
may appear in the form of formulas, catchwords, or jingles. These techniques encode
material to be learned so that they trigger one’s memory and the entire package of material
is recalled. Here is a common example.
Thirty days hath September
April, June and November;
All the rest have thirty-one
Except February which stands alone.
Here is another little rule that is frequently useful:
“i” before “e” except after “c”
Students can be creative and devise whatever mnemonic device or memory hook is useful
to anchor the material they are learning. The disadvantage of mnemonic devices is that
students spend too much time trying to make up a trick for remembering a piece of
information, and they don’t really understand the basic ideas in the material itself.
Latent Learning
The word latent means hidden; present but not visible; concealed. Latent learning is
information that becomes evident only when it is being used. Latent learning is learning that
takes place without reinforcement or maybe without complete awareness that the
information is being filed in our memories. However, when reinforcement is given, the
information is recalled. For example, a teacher gives a lesson on safety in the wilderness.
One of the students in the class does not give the information much attention.. But later
when a similar real life problem occurs, he suddenly remembers what was said in the
classroom lecture.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
3535
3535
35
trial and error – a
learning
approach  which
involves  trying
various  solutions
until the correct
one is found
Learning by Insight
Learning by insight is based on previous experience that is suddenly pieced together in
the mind. A sudden connection of relationships or components to an answer come
together and the solution appears. When insight occurs, the learner has made many
connections between relationships. The final link which brings the person to a solution
happens after the person quietly ponders a number of different possibilities. For
example, you may slave over a math equation for several minutes. Then you take a
closer look at something you have scribbled beside the equation as a possible solution.
Your doodles cause you to take your thinking one step beyond your current stage of
thinking and the correct answer falls into place.
Trial and Error Learning
Sometimes learning occurs in a very unstructured manner. Trial and error learning is
defined as an attempt to solve a problem by trying various alternatives until the right solution
is found. Sometimes trial and error learning is necessary. But the disadvantage is that a lot of
time is wasted until the learner stumbles upon the correct answer. It is time consuming and
also can be very frustrating The learners must devise ways of keeping track of discarded
possibilities so they don’t start going in circles and repeating mistakes.
Mazes are used in experimental work on trial and error learning. A maze is a large box with
a series of pathways or hallways. One path is the correct path; other pathways lead to a
blind alley or a dead end.

3636
3636
3 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
natural
association – a
collection  of  items
are more easily
remembered if
they  naturally
belong  together
Natural Association
Natural association in learning is sometimes called “belonging” since it implies that
one thing seems to belong with another. This group of objects—knives, forks, spoons,
plates, cups and saucers—would be more easily remembered as a list of words or
collection of items than would— planes, violets, rivers, oranges, pencils, and
telephones—which have no easily seen connection.
Related to the idea of natural association is the notion that we begin with ideas or concepts
we know and build hooks or anchors from the new information to the data that has already
been successfully stored in our minds. That process builds a bridge between known
information and new information that is relatively unknown.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
3737
3737
37
intensity – a vivid
learning
experience  will
make a lasting
impression
Intensity
Intensity or vividness can have a tremendous impact on learning. Intensity simply
means that an experience that is unexpected or that shocks us emotionally will make a
lasting impression on the mind. For example, a stimulus like a loud noise, a flash of
lightning or a near-miss accident will be remembered for some time to come. When a
subject is presented to students in an interesting or vivid manner, it will seldom need
much repetition in order to be remembered. Perhaps one disadvantage of intensity is
that if the emotional shock is too much for the person, extreme fear may block the
learning path.

3838
3838
3 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
advanced
organizer –
information
presented  before
the  main  content
which serves as
an anchor for the
new ideas which
follow
Basic Principles of Efficient Learning
Principle One
Memory is improved if one establishes a set prior to beginning a task involving
memorization. What does that mean? Our set refers to a mental readiness. It tells us to
be aware of specific aspects of the material. If you are told in advance to “look for
something”, your mind is receptive to the appearance of this information.
Principle Two
Memory is facilitated by the conscious intent to learn. If you
decide you are determined to concentrate and not be distracted,
you have a better chance of making this happen. For example,
try to focus on that principle the next time you don’t have a
pencil or paper handy and you have to remember a phone
number that is being dictated over the phone. It’s amazing what
you can remember when you tell yourself, “I must remember
this information.”
Principle Three
The accuracy of our memory is governed by the nature of the stimulus. Organized
material is more easily handled by the memory system than is disorganized information.
Advanced organizers may be used to assist the learner. They are brief packages of
information which are presented before the main content. They serve as an anchor of
information for new ideas. The lesson titles you have for each section of this course are
examples of advanced organizers.
Principle Four
Generally distributed practice is more effective for learning than is massed practice.
Periodic reviews of the material reinforce memory. Soon after the initial exposure to the
data, a review should be given. In most cases, frequent review periods of shorter
duration are more fruitful than one long review.
Principle Five
Self-recitation increases the retention of information. Recitation demands the learner’s
full attention. It makes the learner an active participant in the learning process and in the
selection of what will be remembered. Another useful device related to recitation is
using the question technique to prepare the mind for incoming data. For example, the
learner is asked, “What do you hope to learn in the ‘Safe Lab Procedures’ section of the
course?” Then the learner begins to focus more directly on the information that lies
ahead.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
3939
3939
39
NLP – the study
of the structure of
learning
experiences  which
indicate  how  new
ideas are
absorbed  and
stored using the
senses
Principle Six
Emotions are an important agent in what is remembered or forgotten. Generally
learning is more effective in a pleasant, relaxed atmosphere. However, sometimes a bit
of tension can cause the person to be “on their toes” and ready to learn.
The  Power  of  Personal  Learning  Styles
How do people acquire information and learn about their world? People use their
senses to gain information about what is taking place around them. Individuals store the
information they acquire in certain kinds of memory tapes as they are learning about
their world. Individuals receive and process data about the world in different ways. You
may have an entirely different learning style than your best friend or your family
members.
Neurolinguistic programming or NLP is the
study of the structure of learning experiences.
What individuals sense externally is translated
into internal memory systems. The way
information is absorbed and stored will have
great significance in the way that information
is recalled and used by the individual.
Of the five senses we have, only three are
widely used by individuals as major input
channels for collecting data about our
surroundings. These sensory channels are
visual, auditory and kinesthetic/tactual. Visual
and auditory are self-explanatory. Kinesthetic
refers to whole body experiences involving
feelings, emotions and motion itself. Tactual,
which is the other part of that channel, means learning by touching.
Everyone uses all channels to some degree but each individual has a preferred channel.
Therefore a person’s learning style will differ. The most highly valued channel is the
one that the person typically uses to bring information into the conscious. It is the one
that is used to represent the world and the individual’s experiences. What is your
preferred channel? Probably by the end of this section you will have a very clear
picture of your learning style. It is easy to get in tune with your own preference once
you understand the basic data. Then you will have a feel for the learning style which is
most comfortable for you.

4040
4040
4 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The Visual Learner
Visual learners acquire data about their world through sight. They think in pictures and
in detail. People who are primarily  visual will literally “see” pictures in their heads. For
those people who rely on their visual system, it may be as though
they run movies in their heads when remembering or
storing information. Visual learners are usually good
spellers because they “see” the words and get strong
clues from the visual configurations of the words. The
visual learner may stop when reading from time to time
to stare into space and imagine a scene. They have
vivid imaginations. Visual learners easily remember
faces. They are distracted by visual disorder or
movement.
The Kinesthetic/Tactual Learner
Movement makes children active, motivated learners. For those people who are
primarily kinesthetic/tactual learners, body sensations may be associated with the recall
of an experience. The K/T learners use physical contact for learning and employ
techniques involving the manipulation of objects to fix details in their
minds for future recall. These individuals learn best by doing.
They require direct involvement in what they learn,
referred to as the “hands on” experience. When K/T
learners have trouble spelling a word, they prefer to write
it down to check back if it “feels” right to them. They
may find that walking or pacing while reading enhances
their concentration. The K/T learner gestures a lot while
speaking. They select solutions to problems that involve a great deal of
activity.
The Auditory Learner
If individuals are auditory, they prefer to take in information through
sound. They may actually hear original tones or dialogue in their
heads when remembering. For many auditory people, accessing
information may be like hearing the replaying of a tape recorder. They
enjoy listening, but they like talking even more!
They may often move their lips while reading. Auditory learners
respond well to lectures and discussion groups. Because they are
sensitive to sounds, they are easily distracted. Many students with
learning problems seem to be auditory learners.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
4141
4141
41
To have a better understanding of the three learning modes, try this experiment. Sit
back, take a deep breath and relax in your seat. Close your eyes. Create a visual picture
of a clown with multi-coloured hair and a bright plaid costume or a bouquet of deep red
roses. Now, with your eyes closed, create a kinesthetic representation of a breeze
blowing on your face or the feeling of softness as you pet a rabbit. Finally, with your
eyes closed, create an auditory representation of a telephone ringing or your favourite
song being played.
People experience the previous sensations with varying degrees of vividness. The system
that was easiest for you to relate to is the one you typically use to represent the world and
bring information into consciousness.
Individuals have a primary communication channel which they rely upon during times of
stress or when problem solving. Besides having a dominant or favoured learning style, the
learner also has a secondary choice. People have widely different preferences. For
example, some may have two sensory channels that are almost equally comfortable for
them. Others may have one very dominant channel and they may seldom use the remaining
channels.
How can one’s learning style be determined? Learning preferences can be detected by:
•   asking which type of learning tasks are preferred or using an inventory
•   listening to the predicates which are verbs or key words that appear in the
learner’s speech
•   observing the eye movements of the learner

4242
4242
4 2Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Inventories and Checklists
Ask some general questions: How do you make decisions? How are you motivated to
perform a task? How do you tackle a tough problem? What do you do when you want to
be creative?
A checklist of choices may be provided.
When I have to learn something, I prefer to learn by:
_______listening to a lecture
_______seeing a film
_______doing an actual demonstration of the skill
_______talking about the concepts in a discussion group
_______reading a book about it
_______playing a part or a role
_______listening to taped instructions
_______following diagrams outlining the concepts
_______doing a step by step replay of the skill
_______debating the major issues
Which activities are most enjoyable for you?
Predicates
Predicates are words a person chooses to describe their life experiences. Predicates
indicate complex internal thought processes that are occurring. Read the following questions
and pay particular attention to the italicized words. Ask yourself: Is this person a visual
learner, an auditory learner or a kinesthetic/tactual learner?
•   Is this information in tune with what you learned in the previous lesson?
•   Can you picture the obstacles the main character would have to overcome?
•   Can you grasp the key idea in that paragraph?
•   How would you handle a problem like that?
•   Have you voiced your concerns about the key disadvantage in your reference?
•   How will you focus on the main problem in the introduction?
Here is the key: A, V, K/T, K/T, A, V

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
4343
4343
43
Visual Imagined
Right
Visual Remembered
Left
Auditory
Imagined
Right
Auditory
Remembered
Left
Eye Movements
Many photographs have been taken of eye scan movements which indicate that eyes
move in a definite pattern as learners access information from their memories. A
question is asked and then the person is observed to find what eye movement patterns
occur. When people think, their eye movements correspond to the ways in which they
remember information or project new ideas. Eye movements are a clue to what mental
operations are happening. When a person looks away after being asked a question, that
is an indication of a switch from external to an internal search for information. They are
“going inside” to find answers.
This is the eye movement pattern for right-handed people and for left-handed people who
write with their hand curved in a hook movement.
When people access a visual memory of something that has actually happened, the eyes
move up and to the left. The eyes move up and to the right when a person is imagining a
visual memory they are making-up.
When people access an auditory memory of something that actually happened, their
eyes move across to the left ear. An imagined auditory memory will show the eyes
moving across to the right ear.

4444
4444
4 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Kinesthetic
Right
Internal Dialogue
Left
maturation –
development of a
human being or
animal  through
growth  and  aging
controlled  by
internal
biological  factors
When people access a kinesthetic memory of something, the eyes move downward
toward the body and to the right. If the eyes move downward and to the left, that is an
indication that the person is carrying on an internal dialogue with herself or himself
which is auditory as well.
Human Development: Maturation/Learning
Let us try to examine when and how we learn considering the input from both learning and
maturation. Some present-day psychologists have concluded that a new baby learns from
the very first day of life. There are other theories that learning begins in the womb before
birth. These views contradict an earlier belief that an infant is an unresponsive organism
which can only breathe and eat.
Two major factors modify human behaviour. One is learning; the other is maturation.
Maturation is the development of the individual through growth processes. It is controlled by
internal biological factors. Maturation means the ordinary development of growth and
aging. It occurs naturally without any conscious effort on the part of the individual.
Maturation provides the potential or the basic ability to do something which then makes
way for learning to occur.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
4545
4545
45
An example of maturation from the animal
world is birds acquiring the ability to fly, and
fish acquiring the ability to swim. Human
beings are more complex. A child’s learning
to walk may be attributed to maturation
because the child learns to walk when
reaching a particular stage in development.
Not every child begins to walk at the same
age. Let’s examine a few examples of
physical skills the young child acquires to
see how maturation and learning work hand
in hand.
For example, a child learns to colour
pictures, keeping inside the lines. Maturation
is helpful from the point of view of
developing eye-hand coordination to handle
the task. Learning is helpful because the
child watches others colour and copies their
behaviour.
Another example: the child acquires the
ability to ride a bicycle. Maturation provides
strength, balance, and coordination so this
task can be done. Learning is helpful
because the child has watched others ride a
bike and may try a few practice sessions to
polish skills for bicycle-riding.

4646
4646
4 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The Basic Theories of Piaget
Jean Piaget was a famous Swiss psychologist. He
gained worldwide recognition for his studies of the
thought processes of children. Piaget outlined four
principle stages of concept formation. A concept
refers to the meaning an individual gives to various
objects or abstract ideas. Concept formation refers to
the way we build these ideas in our mind. For
example, you can picture concept formation as being
like the process a child goes through when assembling
interlocking blocks to make various shapes and
structures.
The following important principles were described by Piaget when talking about
concept formation:
•   each stage must occur in proper sequence
•   a child cannot attempt a more difficult skill until mastering the skills at a lower
level
•   each stage is cumulative; earlier skills are retained and lay the foundation for
reaching the next higher level
•   the child acquires skills gradually and in a systematic order
Trying to hurry a child into understanding a more
difficult concept will not bring positive results. In
fact, it may lead to a lot of frustration. For
example, trying to push young children into
understanding a new concept before they are ready
is like trying to get a group of eight month old
babies to start walking.
Piaget talked about the human mind oscillating
between a state of equilibrium and disequilibrium.
Basically we are content until ideas about our
environment no longer fit. Then we go to work
searching for answers, absorbing new information
and reorganizing our ideas. Thus throughout our
lifetime, our concepts change. The concept one
person may construct in response to an experience
may differ from the concept another person
constructs from an identical experience.
concept
formation –
building a system
of  ideas  about
concrete  objects
or abstract ideas

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
4747
4747
47
Let’s return to a closer examination of Piaget’s four principle stages of concept
formation. Keep in mind that the ages suggested for each stage are approximate.
During the sensorimotor stage, babies learn through physical contact with their surroundings
by using their senses. They acquire a basic idea of cause and effect. For example, if they
push the ball, it will roll across the room.
Object constancy or object permanency is one of the most important concepts the child
learns during this period. Object constancy is the idea that objects continue to exist even
when they are not visible. For example, if a young child is playing with a dangerous toy, you
can take the toy away, put it up in the cupboard and tell the child, “It’s all gone”. A very
young child will accept this explanation as being true. As toddlers get a little older, they
realize that cannot happen. An object can’t just disappear because it’s out of sight; that’s
object constancy.
rotomirosneS-enOegatS
egAetamixorppAruoivaheB
htnom1othtriBxelfergnikcuS
shtnom6othtnom1
ehtgnisolcdnagninepo,.g.estcaniatrecfonoititepeR
sgelehtgnikcikrosdnah
shtnom11otshtnom6stnemevomfonoitanidrooC
shtnom81otshtnom11thguoserasmelborpotsnoituloS
lanoitarepoerP-owTegatS
egAetamixorppAruoivaheB
sraey4otshtnom81laicosnosisahpmeeromybdecalpersissendertnec-fleS
noitcaretni
sraey7otsraey4
serutaefniamehtnosesucof-noitartneceDdnanoitartneC
sliatedtnatropmirehtorofstnuoccaoslatub,tcejbonafo
object  constancy
–  objects  continue
to exist even when
they are not
visible
For example, using centration and decentration, the child would
notice the ball on the left has a triangle shape with a smaller ball 
inside it.  The ball on the right has a zigzag line through it.

4848
4848
4 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The whole process of conceptualization is greatly aided and accelerated when the
young child seriously begins to learn the language at 18 months. During Stage Two, the
child also learns to draw which means the child is becoming familiar with abstract
symbols. “What’s that?”  is a common question the child asks while busily labelling all
the objects in sight. At this point the child can understand the concept of height and
length but not mass or volume. For example, the child will correctly answer the
question, “Who is taller - you or your father?” But the child may be uncertain about
which cake is bigger—one that is 23 cm x 23 cm or one that is 23 cm x 33 cm. Another
example: If 4 toy soldiers are grouped together and 4 toy soldiers are spaced a distance
apart, the child might be inclined to say there are fewer toy soldiers in the first group.
The child uses make-believe as a tool for understanding and making sense of the adult
world.
Which  person
is the shortest?
Problem solving abilities improve during this stage. Children begin to think logically, organize
their knowledge, and classify objects. They can accept the challenge of more
complicated thought problems. Children can now understand that volume remains
constant when moving liquid from one container to another. For example, one begins
with equal amounts of a liquid in identical containers. Then the liquid in one container
is poured into a differently shaped container. The child can now understand that the
volumes in the two containers are still equal.
lanoitarepOetercnoC-eerhTegatS
egAetamixorppAruoivaheB
sraey11otsraey7laersitahwsezisahpmE

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
4949
4949
49
The child also understands the conservation of mass and weight. For example, a cake is cut
into eight pieces. The mass and weight of the whole cake are identical to the combined mass
and weight of the eight pieces. A younger child who has not yet reached the concrete
operational stage is inclined to say that the eight pieces are more because there are more of
them.
Young people are now comfortable in dealing with abstract concepts. Abstract
concepts are ideas about objects that are viewed separately or apart from the physical
object. A concrete concept is a doghouse; an abstract concept is religious freedom.
Existing concepts become more complex and refined. Many new concepts are
developed. The powers of reasoning increase. Young people are now developing adult
logic which is marked by the ability to reason things out beginning with a hypothesis.
They begin to think about the future in a realistic manner.
lanoitarepOlamroF-ruoFegatS
egAetamixorppAruoivaheB
sraey51otsraey11elbissopsitahwotnevigsithguohT
abstract  concepts
–  ideas  about
objects,
relationships,  and
structures

5050
5050
5 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
A  Mixture  of  Reinforcement,  Reward,  and  Punishment
So far in this lesson we have talked about the personal side of learning. We discussed
self concept, motivation and attitudes. We have just completed a study of Jean Piaget’s
stages of human development from infancy to adolescence. You remember in Section 1,
Lesson 1 we mentioned that to enable psychology to advance to the category of
experimental science, it was necessary for psychology to become involved with the
scientific testing of data. Well, in preparation for the challenging topics of classical and
operant conditioning, our first step will be to talk about important variables that are used
in such procedures—reinforcement, intermittent and secondary reinforcement, reward,
and punishment.
You remember that a stimulus is an object, event or situation which causes a person or
an animal to behave in a particular way. A stimulus could be a red light, a ringing telephone,
a waving hand, or a touch on the arm. A response is the way a person or an animal
behaves toward the stimulus. If a situation occurs and a young child responds to it in a
favourable way, a parent might attempt to strengthen that connection by providing
reinforcement. A reinforcement is a process that increases the chances of a certain
behaviour occurring again. For example, there are a pile of toys in the living room (stimulus),
the child puts them away in the toy cupboard (response). The parent is pleased with the
child’s behaviour and therefore rewards the child with a cookie and praise (reinforcement).
A cookie, a hug, getting extra privileges at home, and an allowance are all examples of
positive reinforcement. Presenting a reinforcement strengthens the response. That’s pretty
clear. But negative reinforcement is also a possibility. A negative reinforcement includes
anything negative that is removed from the environment like loud noises, physical pain,
punishment, or annoyances of any kind. Removing a reinforcement strengthens the
response.
reinforcement – a
process that
strengthens  the
possibility  of  a
response occur-
ring  once  again
positive
reinforcement – a
pleasant  or
favourable  factor
that increases the
likelihood  of  a
response
negative
reinforcement –
removing a
negative  factor
that increases the
likelihood  of  a
response

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
5151
5151
51
Since negative reinforcement is a little more difficult to visualize, let’s think of some
illustrations. For example, a little girl knows that if she picks up all of her toys she
won‘t get a scolding. Removing the threat of a scolding encourages her to behave in a
favourable way. Another example: you fell and broke your arm while skating. The pain
is intense. When you go to the doctor for treatment, you anticipate even more pain
while your arm is being properly set in a cast. However, you decide to go to the doctor
to repair the damage of the broken arm knowing that it will eventually feel better. Both
positive and negative reinforcement are rewards.
Positive reinforcement......................................presenting strengthens response
Negative reinforcement.....................................removing strengthens response
Does the amount of time between a correct response and the reinforcement of that
response have a significant effect in learning the response? The shorter the time span
between a correct response and the reward, the more likely the animal or person will
learn that response.
Complete reinforcement means that when an
animal or person makes a correct response, a reward
or reinforcement is given each and every time it
occurs. Complete reinforcement is important in the
first stages of learning when habits are becoming
established. Partial or intermittent reinforcement
means that when an animal or person makes a
correct response, sometimes a reward is given, and
sometimes it is withheld. Partial reinforcement can
follow a definite pattern, or sometimes it is random
and unpredictable. For example, every third time
your dog does a trick, you give him a dog biscuit.
Or, occasionally you give your dog a biscuit for
doing a trick if you happen to be in the right mood
that day.
Some experimental evidence suggests that both people and animals perform faster and
for longer periods of time when given intermittent reinforcement rather than complete
reinforcement. If a person is always rewarded, the person may begin to take the reward
for granted. Intermittent rewards often increase the individual’s motivation to try harder
and therefore receive more frequent rewards in the future.
A secondary reinforcement is a reward that has been associated with something that
satisfies the actual need. It becomes the reward in a round-about way. The secondary
reinforcement is not a direct reward but is a stepping-stone to help you get what you
want. Money is a very common example of a secondary reinforcement. Money gives us
the opportunity to acquire the things we need and want to satisfy our desires. We work
complete
reinforcement –
when a correct
response is made,
reinforcement is
given  each  and
every time
partial
reinforcement
(intermittent) –
when a correct
response is made,
sometimes
reinforcement is
given  and
sometimes it is
withheld
secondary
reinforcement – a
reward that is
associated  with
something  that
fulfills  the  actual
need e.g. money

5252
5252
5 2Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
for money which in turn satisfies our needs. Here is another example: when you were
in elementary school your teacher gave you stars on your assignments for good work.
When you received a certain number of stars, you would get a treat of some kind. The
stars you received would be secondary reinforcement.
One of the basic learning principles is that it is more effective to reinforce desired behaviour
with reward than to punish undesired behaviour. A child is rewarded with love for good
behaviour; a child is spanked for bad behaviour. A positive reinforcement does more to
motivate good behaviour in the future than the fear of punishment does to make the person
avoid negative behaviour. Therefore, reward is usually a more significant influence in shaping
or changing one’s behaviour.
Mild punishment might be useful in some circumstances if it cautions people to be more
careful about behaviour that could be potentially dangerous. However, the fear and anxiety
generated by punishment usually hampers the learning process. Punishment stops
undesirable behaviour, but the behaviour may reappear if the punishment ceases.
Punishment is not a permanent solution for improving behaviour.
Punishment tells the individual what not to do; it does not indicate what the person should
do. Punishment merely says “no”. For example, suppose you are learning a new skill that
you have never seen before. You are handed a strange piece of equipment. You move your
hand one way, and you are punished. You try another movement and are punished again.
You try a third way and receive more punishment. Have you learned the skill? No! But you
have probably picked up a great sense of fear. Punishment may make a person or animal so
fearful that they make even more mistakes than usual. Punishment may lead to behaviour
that is less predictable than behaviour that comes from rewarding desirable responses.
Anxiety interferes with learning. If a family member is sick, you may be worried about them
and can’t concentrate.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
5353
5353
53
Classical  Conditioning
In 1901, Russian psychologist Ivan Pavlov
conducted a very interesting experiment with dogs.
He had noticed that just when he was about to feed
his dogs, they would drool saliva from their
mouths. This response was quite natural because
they needed these juices to soften their food and
begin digestion. But then Pavlov began the practice
of ringing a bell at the same time or just before he
gave them food. After a good many feedings
following the bell-ringing routine, he decided to
just ring the bell without immediately giving them
their food. He noticed that the dogs salivated as
they had done before. In other words, whereas
formerly they had made the response of salivation
to the appearance of food, they now salivated when
the stimulus was merely the sound of the bell.
Conditioning refers to the learning of a particular response when a stimulus is
presented. For example, when the telephone rings (stimulus), you pick it up (response).
You are conditioned to answer the phone when it rings. Classical conditioning refers
to a learning situation in which a certain stimulus (situation or event) brings forth a
response that it did not previously produce. The dogs in Pavlov’s experiment were
subjected to classical conditioning. Let’s break down the elements of the situation to
understand it better.
In Pavlov’s experiment, the meat is the unconditioned stimulus (UCS) because meat is the
normal, natural product that would cause saliva to flow in dogs. The flow of saliva is known
as the unconditioned response (UCR) because that response occurs naturally with no
learning necessary.
When Pavlov rang a bell and then offered the dogs food, he was linking a conditioned
stimulus (CS) to a conditioned response (CR). In other words, the dogs learned to
associate a bell with food which is an unnatural response that must be learned. Bells do
not automatically bring the idea of food to mind unless that association has been
learned.
conditioning –
learning  a
particular
response when a
stimulus is
presented
classical
conditioning –
pairing  an
unconditioned
stimulus with a
new stimulus until
this  conditioned
stimulus  elicits
the  given
response
unconditioned
stimulus (UCS) –
a stimulus that
automatically
elicits a response
with  no  learning
involved
unconditioned
response (UCR) –
a response that
automatically
occurs with no
learning  involved
UCS
(meat)
Unlearned
UCR
(flow of saliva)
CS
(bell sound)
Learned
CR
(saliva flows when bell is heard)

5454
5454
5 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
counter
conditioning –
replacing  a
conditioned
response to a
particular
stimulus with a
different  response
extinction –
elimination  of
conditioned
response by
continually
withholding
reinforcement
spontaneous
recovery – the
reappearance  of
conditioned
response after a
rest period
following
extinction
Some pet owners have noticed that dogs or cats hear the sound of an electric can
opener and associate that sound with feeding time because the pet is often given a can
of food after that sound is heard.
Let’s see how that behaviour would be presented.
In some cases counter-conditioning may be necessary
when we want an individual to learn a new behaviour.
Counter-conditioning means replacing one conditioned
response to a particular stimulus with a different
response. It is often used to get rid of undesirable
behaviour. Counterconditioning breaks the original
connection and links another response to the stimulus.
For example, many people believe that smoking
cigarettes is enjoyable, sophisticated, and cool. Counter-
conditioning could be attempted by having someone
who is having severe respiratory ailments speak about
the suffering cigarette smoking has brought them.
Extinction refers to the elimination of a conditioned response because the conditioned
stimulus has been presented many times without the usual reinforcement. For example,
an electric can opener is turned on fifty times and your pet dog never receives food
once after hearing that sound. The dog will eventually believe that the can opener
sound is no longer linked to food. Extinction has occurred for that habit.
It is very difficult to eliminate well learned behaviours. Spontaneous recovery is the
reappearance of a conditioned response after a rest period following extinction. During the
period of extinction, no reinforcement has been given at all. Those conditions make it
amazing that a spontaneous recovery of the response suddenly takes place out of the blue.
For example, take the previous situation with the pet and the electric can opener Your dog
has heard the can opener fifty times without food, and he no longer reacts to the can opener
as if he expects food. One day the can opener is used and he suddenly whines for food
even though the can opener has been used many times without providing food for him. His
whining indicates spontaneous recovery because the link in his mind between food and the
electric can opener has been revived. Another example: a young woman witnessed a bad
traffic accident. She was so upset by what she saw, that when the police officer asked her
address, she automatically started giving the address from a previous residence where she
had lived 8 years ago.
UCS
(an open can
of food)
Unlearned
UCR
(cat meows because
they smell food)
CS
(sound of electric
can opener)
Learned
CR
(meowing because can opener
sound now means "food")

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
5555
5555
55
Generalization occurs when similar experiences are presented to the individual. A
conditioned response to certain stimuli is established. Other stimuli which is similar will
also bring about that response. That is generalization. For example, if the dog has been
conditioned to whine when he hears the electric can opener he might also whine when
he hears the blender or electric mixer if he perceives these sounds are similar to that of
the can opener. Another example: a young child is shown how to pet a cat. When the
child sees other animals like dogs, bunnies, and hamsters, she generalizes that she
should pet these animals in the same way.
Operant  Conditioning
Operant conditioning is the strengthening of a certain
response by immediately presenting reinforcement if
the response occurs. The word operant is used
because the person’s response in some way operates
on the environment. For example, students study their
psychology notes so that they can do the assignments
and pass the exam. Another example: a dog obeys the
command to “sit” so it receives a treat. Another example: a
child is assigned household chores which are completed
enabling the child to receive an allowance.
To avoid confusion between operant and classical conditioning, let’s look at the process
involved in each one in its simplest form.
In summary, the order of events is different between classical and operant conditioning.
Here are two other differences:
•   in operant conditioning, the subject takes a more active role in the situation
•   in operant conditioning, the unconditioned stimulus is not known; it usually
involves a motivation we can’t directly observe. For example, we don’t know
exactly what motivates a student to study, a dog to sit, or a child to do the
household chores. We assume they are working for certain goals, but we are not
sure how the motivation works. In classical conditioning, the unconditioned
stimulus is specifically known. A dish of food is shown to a hungry dog. When it
is filled, the dog will come and eat it.
generalization –
similar
experiences are
grouped  together
and  the
individual
responds to them
all in the same
way
operant
conditioning –
strengthening  a
response by
immediately
presenting
reinforcement
following  the
response
The Order of Events for Classical Conditioning
stimulusreinforcement
response
The Order of Events for Operant Conditioning
stimulusreinforcement
response

5656
5656
5 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Mind  Mapping  Skills
Mind mapping is an extremely useful skill to develop when there is a lot of
information to understand, absorb, and remember for future reference. Mind mapping is
also called concept mapping or webbing. The beauty of mind mapping is that is it a
personal, simple, and clear way to remember large volumes of material.
Mind mapping is like a shorthand diagram of a concept.
•   Use a blank sheet of paper for your ideas.
•   Print the concept you are focusing on in the centre of the page. Enclose it in a
circle. You may want to enhance it by drawing a symbol in the circle with the
printed name.
•   Think of major components associated with the key concept. For each main
component, draw a line or a “branch” radiating out from the centre circle. Label each
branch in large print. The labels you choose are like stepping stones to the
complex information associated with each main branch. Use a different colour to
trace each branch.
•   Think about secondary information associated with each of the main branches.
Each new idea gets a branch line and a label of its own. Where ever a symbol
comes to mind, sketch it beside the name.
Colour reinforces the key ideas in our minds. This may seem rather silly like an elementary
exercise, but remember, you are simplifying material so the brain can easily store it and
retrieve it. The branching network of ideas clearly shows the relationships between the key
concept, the main components, and the secondary ideas. The simple labels we choose for
each key idea helps the connections as well. Simple symbol sketches are important memory
anchors which help build the memory bridges.
mind mapping –
illustrating  a
concept  with
branches of ideas
related to it
concept
key concept
secondary
information

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
5757
5757
57
Let’s build a very simple mind map around a concept that is easily understood and
practised by everyone—What I Do In the Morning. You appear in the centre. Do you
want to draw yourself in old-fashioned pyjamas and nightcap?
Some of the main branch lines will include: tidying bedroom, interacting with family
members, eating, personal hygiene, dressing, pre-work chores, and mental readiness for
work.
Look at the concept map drawn below to see how each branch detail is completed and to
check some of the symbols that are used.
Remember, a mind map must be completed in an array of colours.
Colour each branch along with its secondary branches a specific colour. The next branch
with its network of secondary branches is done in a different colour. Notice how colour
provides a stronger anchor for memory.

5858
5858
5 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
SQ3R – survey,
question,  read,
recite, review
A  Road  Map  To  Improve  Your  Reading
Having a good foundation in reading skills is important for academic success. Hints to
improve reading skills can be summarized in the SQ3R technique as follows:
SURVEY
Begin by skimming a chapter. Read the main headings. Notice how the information
has been organized. Look at the pictures. Read the diagrams, charts, graphs, and
bold print words to get the main idea of the chapter.
QUESTION
If the author has a set of questions at the end of the chapter, read them and give them
some thought. Questions of your own which you expect to be answered in the
chapter should come to mind. This will give you a purpose for reading.
READ
Read the chapter thoroughly now.
RECITE
When you have finished reading, respond to your original questions in your own
words. Summarize what you have read.
REVIEW
Keep brief notes about the major
points in the chapter. Refer to them
from time to time to refresh you
memory.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
5959
5959
59
Efficiency  Begins  With  Your  Own  Study  Habits
Let’s get very practical in this section and discuss methods you can utilize to improve
your day-to-day study efficiency. As a beginning, you might be wise to take a very
close personal inventory of your study habits. Consider these questions:
•   What is the best time of day for you to study?
•   How long is your average, uninterrupted study session?
•   Do you attempt to engage in other activities while studying
like listening to the radio or snacking?
•   Generally, how often are you interrupted by other people
while studying?
•   How often do you study with other students? What is
your reason for doing so?
•   What is the best place for you to study—sitting at a desk or reclining on the floor
or on the bed?
•   What subjects require the most time for study?
•   What subjects are most difficult to study? Should you try to do the tough subjects
all at once or try to intersperse them with easy subjects?
Efficiency in learning means more free time for you. If you have developed an individual
style of studying that is working for you and is suited to your own tastes, then good for you!
It is not necessary to follow someone else’s formula unless you are working without
any guidelines and are having problems.
Top  Students  Reveal  These  Secrets  To  Success
Here are some tips from exceptional students:
•   Have a goal in mind. Don’t underestimate your own
abilities if your goal is important.
•   Be self-motivated. The greatest thrill is meeting your own
expectations.
•   Don’t be overly concerned about your peers.
•   Be familiar with time and stress management that suits you. Plan your priorities.
Stick with what you can handle and be realistic about what you can accomplish.
•   Don’t procrastinate. Do homework as soon as it has been assigned so you don’t
get back-logged.
•   Be flexible. Save some time to relax and have fun as a balance to your work load.

6060
6060
6 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Summary
Hopefully this lesson has not been too much of a challenge with an overload of abstract
ideas. Learning theory is not an easy topic to tackle.
To summarize:
•   Learning involves mastering information from many sources to increase
competence.
•   Learning can be perceptual motor (acquiring a physical skill), affective
(involving emotions) or cognitive (involving problem solving).
•   Self-concept means how we view ourselves.
•   Students with a positive self-concept have confidence in their learning
ability; a negative self-concept leads to feelings of inferiority.
•   Being motivated and having a positive attitude toward the learning situation
will make people more effective learners.
•   Maturation refers to development through growth and aging; maturation and
learning work together to help people acquire skills.
•   The learning curve shows a lot of variation because people master material in
different ways.
•   Plateaus occur in learning when there is a standstill in learning progress.
•   Transfer means that learning in one situation can be applied to another
situation.
•   Transfer is positive if it improves the learning situation; it is negative if earlier
learning interferes with present learning.
•   Overlearning means to learn information until you know it thoroughly and
have complete mastery of it.
•   Massed practice means that learning occurs during the space of one session.
•   Distributed practice means that learning sessions are separated by rest
periods.
•   Serial learning refers to learning a series of responses in a definite sequence.
The first item is easiest remembered (primacy effect) and so is the last item on
the list (recency effect).
•   Mnemonic devices are formulas or jingles that are devised to help one
remember.
•   Sometimes we are not aware that we have learned something until after the
fact; that is latent learning.
•   Learning by insight occurs when a person suddenly puts together the right
pieces of the problem.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
6161
6161
61
•   Trial and error learning involves attempting to solve a problem by
randomly testing solutions.
•   Natural association involves grouping together similar kinds of objects or
concepts.
•   An intense emotional experience will have a lasting impact on our memories.
•   Neurolinguistic programming gives us information about our own personal
learning style.
•   Visual learners primarily gather data about their surroundings through sight
and store memory of these events in pictures.
•   Kinesthetic/tactual learners use body movement, sensations, and emotions to
collect and store data about their lives.
•   Auditory learners prefer to take in information through sound and may
actually replay dialogue or sounds in their heads to remember.
•   Inventories, predicates, and eye movements reveal a learner’s preferred
style.
•   Jean Piaget outlined four principle stages of concept formation.
•   Stage One—Sensorimotor (birth to 18 months), acquires information
through the senses, learns object constancy.
•   Stage Two—Preoperational (18 months to 7 years), learns more
sophisticated concepts through language, notices details, understands
height and length.
•   Stage Three—Concrete Operational (7 to 11 years), classifies objects plus
understands that volume, mass and weight remain constant, that is, objects
do not automatically expand or decrease in size.
•   Stage Four—Formal Operational (11 to 15 years), abstract concepts
become more complex and refined.
•   Presenting a positive reinforcement strengthens the possibility of a response;
removing negative reinforcement also strengthens the possibility of a
response.
•   Partial or intermittent reinforcement means that reinforcement is not
provided for every correct response.
•   Secondary reinforcement is an indirect reward.
•   Punishment is less effective than reward in encouraging the learning
process.
•   Classical conditioning involves stimulus—reinforcement—reward.
•   Operant conditioning involves stimulus—reward—reinforcement.

6262
6262
6 2Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
A
•   Counter-conditioning means reprogramming a stimulus to a different
response.
•   Extinction occurs when a conditioned response has been eliminated.
•   Spontaneous recovery means the reappearance of a response after a rest-
time.
•   When similar experiences are grouped together, the individual is
generalizing.
•   Mind mapping means presenting the details of a concept in diagram format.
•   SQ3R means survey, question, read, recite, and review material.
Turn to Assignment Booklet 2 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
6363
6363
63
Lesson 2: Thinking and Memory
Overview
Thought and language are two tools that are used every minute of the waking day. Our
very advanced form of thinking sets us apart from all other kinds of animals. Language
too is a very special mode of human communication for expressing emotions, abstract
thoughts, and useful day-to-day information for living. Take just one aspect of our life-
leisure-and consider what immense changes would take place without language. The
restrictions would be overwhelming! With the multitude of people that populate the
earth, could we survive without a complex system of thought and language even if we
were to regress to the very simplest lifestyle?

6464
6464
6 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Lesson 2 will focus on topics:
•   First Memories
•   The Brain: Thinking Power
•   Left Brain/Right Brain
•   Tools for Thinking: Language and Symbols
•   Thinking Basics
•   Thinking Processes: Remembering
•   Thinking Processes: Reasoning
•   Thinking Processes: Critical Thinking
•   Thinking Problems: Forgetting
•   Communication Problems: Dyslexia
•   Concentration Problems: Attention Deficiency Disorder
•   Interrelating Problems: Autism
•   The Element of Colour
Before we begin this lesson think about some of the useful learning techniques that were
presented. One of the values of learning is to apply knowledge to bring about improvements
and make a difference. It is a complete waste of time to learn something beneficial and let it
sit on the shelf collecting dust.
So take a few minutes. You are expected to exercise your brain before you begin because
this lesson is mentally challenging.
•   Flip through the pages, rereading the titles.
•   Note any illustrations.
•   Find some of the bold print words.
•Think about the topic
•   Read the assignments that you are expected to complete.
•   If you have a few minutes, check the important words in the glossary
Remember to use these techniques with all of your future lessons to build your learning
power skills.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
6565
6565
65
Special  First  Memories  and  Personal  Memories
You are in a crib, hoping to be fed and changed. Your mobile swings above your crib which
soothes your feelings and occupies your mind for a while. After what seems like a long time,
you start crying loudly and your mother appears at the bedroom door to look after you. She
is wearing a white cotton dress with a wide wing collar. You can even remember the fragrant
perfume she is wearing. With great conviction you state: “This was my very first memory.” Is
that possible? Is that true?
Some people solemnly swear they can clearly remember events from their earliest
babyhood. Other people have the odd memory of episodes in their preschool days
especially if the event was full of emotion—moving to a new house, death of a pet, an injury,
or the birth of a new sibling. Many people can recall the drama of their first day of school.
Other people stare blankly for a while and then say, “Well, I don’t remember anything until I
was about 9 or 10 years old.”
The early memories we salvage have an interesting background. First, language is a
key factor. Getting the memories into an oral language and being able to talk to
someone about them is important for remembering. What about people who say that
through hypnosis they are able to remember events from their early infancy? These are
not accurate pictures. An infant does not possess a developed memory. Some people
say they were able to understand a conversation which is beyond the capacity of a
young child. In general, we usually do not store an event in our memory when we are
at the pre-verbal stage before we have developed a basic language structure.
Neurons play a central part in memory. Neurons connect to other neurons and form cell
assemblies. Memories derive from the interactions of cell assemblies. Young children cannot
recall memories of their early childhood because the cell assemblies have not yet developed.
It is interesting to note that no two cell assemblies are organized in the same way, therefore
each person’s cell assemblies are unique in that aspect.
neuron – a single
nerve cell; in
order  to  function,
the neuron needs
to be part of a
system of nerves

6666
6666
6 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Can you portray an accurate description of what went on as an adult looking back at
childhood memories? In general, you can’t. If you find a diary from your earlier years, you
may be quite astonished at the discrepancies between your view of the event as a young
person and what you have stored in your memory as an adult. Would you want a perfect
memory? Would you want every event that happened to you to be stored accurately and
recalled with perfect detail and emotion? What about the pain of an event? There is a lot of
benefit to the fact we do not have perfect memories or that memories change or diminish
over time.
Children who have a lot of confidence in themselves have poorer memories. They
don’t remember their failures. A lot of our lives are so boring and routine that they
never get into our memories in the first place. For example, you get up, wash, dress, eat
breakfast and leave for school or for work. None of those everyday routines are
memorable unless something unusual happens.
What can we do to keep our memories alive and
fresh? Some memories just endure because we enjoy
them, we talk about them. Family photo albums are
important records. Diaries are very common.
Sometimes people get a tape recorder and record
their memories in that way. With the popularity of
video cameras, that is certainly a precise way to
capture not only the memory, but also the emotion of
an event. Videos are most commonly used to record
the positive moments in our lives. Will we get an
“unbalanced” view of the past if we rely too heavily
on a replay of video memories of only pleasant
events?
What is memory for? The point of it is to take experiences from our past in a shape that we
can use them in the present and the future. Our memory writes things in narrative form,
telling a story about the turning points of our life. Memories give us an impression of who we
are and how we came to be that way. In the process of refining our memories, we will drop
some things and edit others. Autobiographical memory has the ability to search our lives
for enduring themes and then to find some striking event in the past that symbolizes that
theme.
Is memory about the past or about the present? Probably the present. An event happens
and is recalled, but the emotional flavour of what happened comes from the present.
Memory is alive. Memories change. Memories are our allies that help us cope. They
nourish us.
autobiographical
memory – the
personal
memories you
have of your life

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
6767
6767
67
The  Brain
The brain is an incredibly complex
physiological organ. The brain works every
moment of our lives performing many
functions simultaneously—processing our
thoughts, emotions, and imagination. The
brain also monitors critical functions to
maintain the overall health of the body. Our
general social and cultural knowledge is
processed by the brain so that we may
interact in a productive way with other
members of our society. It would seem the
brain is put together in a rigid, defined way,
but the brain’s connections are modified by
the experiences we have had. Learning
actually changes the structure of the brain.
Therefore, the more we learn, the more
unique we become. One might say that the
actual “wiring” of the brain is affected by
school and life experiences.
Some people compare the brain to both an artist and a scientist. The reason for the
comparison is that the brain understands and deciphers patterns as they occur (the scientist);
but the brain goes one step beyond that and creates unique patterns of its own (the artist).
The brain searches for meaning. It has two main functions: to register familiar stimuli and to
simultaneously search for novel stimuli.
Many aspects of the brain remain a mystery, but here are some general principles we have
discovered. The brain resists having meaningless or disorganized patterns imposed on it.
Concentrating too heavily on the storage and recall of unconnected facts is a very inefficient
use of the brain. The brain works best under conditions of relaxed alertness. This means the
most productive conditions favour an atmosphere that is low in threat and high in challenge.
Under perceived threat, we literally lose access to portions of our brain. The brain seems to
be shocked into a state where thinking power is drained away.
Information that is directly presented to the brain is absorbed. But the ability of the brain
goes much beyond that to absorb information and signals that lie in the realm of peripheral;
subtle signals that are not consciously noticed are also detected. This means that the brain
responds to the entire sensory context. We remember what we experience—not just what
we are told. Synergy means our experiences through sight, hearing, movement, and
symbols are all synthesized or drawn together by the brain. The result is intuition, insight and
creativity. The whole spectrum of information processed directly or indirectly by the brain
will influence motives and decisions.
synergy – the
brain  collects
impressions from
sight,  hearing,
symbols and
movement

6868
6868
6 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Right Brain/Left Brain
Recent studies of thinking have revealed that 85% of our brain is devoted to sensing, feeling
and emotion. Only 15% is devoted to cognitive reasoning. But the school system puts
emphasis on the narrower aspect of cognitive reasoning leaving a large part of our brain’s
potential unchallenged.
The human brain is divided into two main parts or hemispheres, the left and the right.
The brain theory suggests that each hemisphere specializes in different kinds of
conscious awareness. The right hemisphere or right brain (these terms will be used
interchangeably) seems to govern artistic talents, intuitive thought, and spatial orientation.
In other words, the right hemisphere handles most of the creativity. It operates in a random
fashion. The right hemisphere is the centre for thinking which occurs by process of intuitive
judgment. The right brain prefers to tackle a large mass of data as a whole rather than picky
details. It likes to react to the “big picture”. Working through problems by beginning with an
overview (global perspective) of the situation is related to inductive reasoning. (You will
learn about that in the section on Thinking Processes: Reasoning.) Right brain people do not
have a precise sense of time; they are often late. The right hemisphere prefers to have real-
life, concrete examples of what we see, hear, and feel. It creates images from this data. It
interprets our environment. The right hemisphere is comfortable in dealing with nonverbal
responses, movement, athletic behaviours, and synthesizing processes (drawing ideas
together). Visual and emotional awareness comes to us through right brain activity. The right
brain focuses on creativity, colour sensitivity, and shapes and patterns. Right brain qualities
have not been explored enough or valued enough.
The left hemisphere or left brain appears to be mainly responsible for logical thought,
language and analytic processes. That is, the left hemisphere responds to problem
solving and rational assessments. The left hemisphere is labelled the rational side of our
mind. The left hemisphere prefers an orderly, sequential, step-by-step analysis of a
problem similar to deductive reasoning process. (See Thinking Processes: Reasoning.)
Labels, headings, classifications are easily
handled by the left brain. The centre for almost
all language processing occurs in the left
hemisphere which means verbal, linguistic
abilities reside here. The left hemisphere is
comfortable with abstract ideas and symbols.
The left brain is skillful in following precise
directions, working with facts and details. Left
brain people are punctual. Left brain activities
are a major part of the current school system.
hemisphere – a
major section of
the  brain-right
and left side
spatial
orientation –
ability  to
visualize  objects
in  relation  to
each  other

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
6969
6969
69
The nerve tissues of the corpus callosum join both hemispheres. One should not get
the impression that the activities of the two hemispheres are completely independent
and uncoordinated. On the contrary, the two hemispheres are well integrated for smooth
functioning.
Most of you have preferred brain activities (left or right) but manage to do many of the
tasks related to the other hemisphere. How can the idea of different mental functions for
each hemisphere be tested? People have been given different mental tasks, and while
they are involved in the tasks, the brain waves are monitored. Tiny electrical waves are
emitted by each hemisphere depending on the mental activity taking place. The human
brain is complex and incredible!
corpus callosum –
the nerve tissue
that  connect,  both
hemispheres of
the  brain
LEFT
RIGHT
Sequential
      Deductive      Reasoning
Abstract - Symbol
      Written      Words
      Spoken      Words
      Numerals
Global
      Inductive      Reasoning
Concrete - Image
 
Visuals
      Sounds
      Feelings
      Body      Movements
Left/Right Hemispheres of the Brain

7070
7070
7 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Tools  For  Thinking:  Language  and  Symbols
Language and thought are of utmost importance for the high quality of life we
experience as human beings. Both language and thought contribute to survival, smooth
functioning of interpersonal relationships, and the all round progress we enjoy.
Language has the power to convey practical information, values, emotions, ideals,
noble thoughts, humour, and entertainment. If you have ever watched or participated in
a game of charades, you will know the frustration of trying to express a thought without
verbal language.
The organization of the language system is very complex. A language system is set up
by using an arbitrary selection of sounds to indicate meaning. Arbitrary refers to
choosing something by random decision. For example, in English b-o-o-k means a
collection of printed words about a topic, or a story. At some point in time, people
agreed to that meaning for b-o-o-k although those letters forming the word “book” have
nothing to do with an actual book. The letters were randomly chosen to represent book.
Through continued usage, a particular meaning of the letters and how they sound
becomes established. For example, when the disease, AIDS, was first diagnosed it had
a longer more cumbersome medical name. The new, shortened version became AIDS,
and after continued usage, a specific meaning to that word has become established and
recognized far and wide.
Rigid rules for the sounds and the words must be obeyed. Both the listener and speaker
must understand and accept the meaning of the terms and definitions if communication
is to be fruitful. If any one of these elements fail, the language system breaks down.
Language employs symbols. A symbol is something used for, or regarded as
representing something else. It could be an object, a gesture, or a sound. A symbol may
be an emblem, token, sign, flag, pin, badge, logo, or a diagram, just to name a few. An
architect’s sketch of your house and the blueprint plans are both symbols of your house
as it exists in the real world. The word “house” on this page is also a symbol of your
place of residence. Symbols enable us to manipulate ideas in the thinking process.
arbitrary –
random,
changing,  varying
symbol –
something  that
represents
something  else

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
7171
7171
71
In summary, what are some of the most significant benefits of language?
•   Language enhances our recollection of past experiences. This ability facilitates
thinking. It allows us to organize and review information so problems may be
easily solved. For example, you say to yourself, “What did I do the last time I had
a similar problem?”
•   More precise and accurate descriptions of objects and events are possible through
language which sharpens our awareness and attention. For example, when you put
names to feelings, they become more focused e.g., nostalgia means thinking of the
past with fond memories.
•   Language establishes and builds group unity. The uniqueness of the language a
group chooses sharpens the feelings of belongingness. For example, the drug
group utilized special slang terms to identify the “in” group. Drug related terms
were frequently changed to keep the group isolated from outsiders as well.
Sometimes language can be used in discriminatory ways when it comes to group
unity. How would your group react to someone who joined them and spoke with
a heavy foreign accent?
•   Language can be used as a means of control through the use of direct requests,
orders and commands. For example, instructions on an exam, verbal commands
by a superior, or a TV appeal supporting a worthy cause are all effective in
directing our behaviour. Indirect, subtle methods of controlling behaviour through
language are also evident. For example, the whole language of advertising is a
fascinating example of this. A popular celebrity uses Brand X and we consider
buying it the next time we shop.
Various Symbols
Money Symbol
Flag Symbol

7272
7272
7 2Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Thinking  Basics
Before we define thinking, let’s look at two important categories of behaviour.
Explicit Behaviour:It is behaviour that is easily observed and measured. Explicit
behaviour is sometimes referred to as overt behaviour. When
you think of the word “overt” think of open or easily seen. For
example, any behaviour involving strenuous muscular activity
like a man lifting a heavy box would be explicit behaviour.
Another example: raising your hand to answer a question.
Implicit Behaviour:It is behaviour not easily
observable by another
person and is usually only
detected with the aid of
special, sensitive measuring
instruments. It is sometimes
referred to as covert
behaviour. When you see the
word “covert” think of
covered or hidden
behaviour. For example,
one’s face remains
expressionless but the pupils
of the eyes dilate to indicate
mild surprise. It could be
detected by the use of special instruments. Another example
would be a person thinking about how to solve a puzzle; the
observer could not see this individual’s thinking processes.
Implicit Speech:Is the term used to refer to the tiny muscular reactions that are
produced while the individual is engaged in thinking. If you look
closely, you can see the vocal chords moving. The person is
said to be sub-vocalizing while reading; it is in between oral
reading and genuine silent reading. Implicit speech has two vital
roles; it receives and assimilates external stimuli and it processes
data internally.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
7373
7373
73
Youngsters have often been observed talking out loud to themselves as they busily
participate in some activity. Later children will talk silently to themselves. Let’s explore
talking and thinking a little further. In fact, we all admit talking to ourselves—even adults do
it! Every time we listen we can hear our inner voices. This is sometimes mistaken for
thinking but it isn’t. Thought has to flow. We think as we speak or write. Self examination
stops thought in its tracks. In our everyday conversations we might think about what we are
going to talk about, but not about how we will actually say it.
So what is thinking? Thinking is part of everything we do. Thinking is the mental
processes and skills we use to shape our lives. Thinking is not an occasional mental
activity. It goes on all the time without awareness. Thinking organizes reality for us. It
creates alternative realities we might hope to achieve or avoid, that is, it brings images
to us of the way things might be if we proceed in a certain direction.
There are various localized centres in the brain for vision, sensory responses, or certain
muscular reactions, but there doesn’t appear to be a localized thought centre. Localized
means that we can pinpoint a specific area that is responsible for each of those
functions.
Thinking is the most complex activity that people perform. It is more than just
perception or an awareness of the environment. Thinking is an implicit behaviour by
which an individual becomes aware of and manipulates past experiences by means of
symbols. This allows us to review the choices we have at hand and make the best decisions
possible.
localized – a
precise area that
is connected to a
specific  function

7474
7474
7 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Thinking  Processes  –  Remembering
Mystery and wonder at the workings of the human mind have frequently been stated. If
we didn’t have memory, language would disappear and so would our meaningful
communication with others. Without memory there would be no intellectual
functioning. We could not utilize past experiences to improve our current situation. Perhaps
the operation of our memory system can be better understood with the explanation that
memory can be subdivided into three sections:
Sensory Memory:memory pertaining to the senses like the smell of a particular
flower, the taste of chocolate cake, or the touch of silk
Motor-skill Memory:memory concerning the remembered response of doing
something physical like walking, skating, riding a bike or
turning a somersault
Verbal Memory:memory involving everything a person has thought, read or
heard
Retention means what is retained or
remembered, or holding on to what
has been learned. Our capacity for
retention in sensory and motor-skill
memory is extremely powerful. For
example, upon seeing a landscape
similar to one you have seen earlier;
you may be convinced that you have
really witnessed the scene before
because of such an acute visual
memory. This experience is labelled
“deja vu” from the French which
means “already seen”. In other
words, we mistakenly believe a
similar experience is a repeated
experience.
A few people have been blessed with photographic memories. That means their visual
memories are so acute and precise that the smallest details are remembered. Someone
with a photographic memory might be able to reproduce word for word recall for
several pages of material as if they had taken a picture in their minds and were reading
the original copy. Some of the great composers have a type of photographic memory
only in the auditory realm. Motor-skill memory is strong too. Once you learn how to
ride a bike, the skill stays with you for life.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
7575
7575
75
Unfortunately verbal memory is not as easy to master as the other two and must be
approached more diligently. Verbal memory comes in two forms: short term or active
and long term. The terms are self-explanatory. Short term memory initially collects and
examines data, but long term memory is really the key to learning.
All the information we receive first goes into short term memory where it can be recalled
very easily. Since we receive so much information everyday, things can only be stored in
short term memory for a brief period of time. Some of that information is successfully coded
so it can be transferred to long term memory. Some information that goes into long term
memory seems to be forgotten. One explanation is that the information may never have
reached long term memory. Another reason could be that the right cues are never presented
in order to call up the information that has been stored possibly under a variety of headings
in long term memory. So a person’s retrieval skills are weak. Long term memories seem to
decay less than short term, but are more subject to interference and distortion from
competing memories.
The likelihood of information getting into long term
storage is greater the smaller the amount of
material presented, the more novel it is, the more
actively it is rehearsed, and the greater its
significance in helping the individual cope with
environmental demands. For example, most
married couples can clearly remember the moment
they became engaged because it has such
significance for their lives. Non-similar or unique
items are remembered with greater ease than
similar items. For example, you may not
remember the first time you tried an apple, orange,
or banana, but you may clearly remember the first
time you tried a pomegranate.
Once material has been learned, it can be relearned with less effort than material not
previously learned. This holds true even if the original learning experience occurred quite
some time earlier. For example, when you were a child you may have memorized a poem.
You may have forgotten a good many of the lines, but when you review it, you spend less
time and effort memorizing the poem the second time around. Another example: When a
song is very popular, you may memorize all the words. When you hear that song several
years later, you may realize you remember a good portion of the verses and the chorus.
short term
memory – the
initial  entry  of
information  to
our awareness
long term memory
– information is
thoroughly
learned  and
understood so we
may retain it over
an  extended
period of time-
maybe even a
lifetime

7676
7676
7 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
We just learned about sensory, motor-skill and verbal memory. Does verbal memory
naturally diminish as we age? Most people would state that it happens, but let’s take a
closer look. Sometimes personal memories from a person’s youth (7 years of age to about
30 years of age) suddenly return with a flood beginning at about 50 years of age. What is
the reason for this? Most of the answers to our life questions were being formed and
defined between 7-30 years of age. This is when the significant events in your life happened.
At 50 years and older you are coming to terms with your life. How did my life turn out?
What are my regrets? Middle aged adults are reworking their memories with those
questions in mind, trying to get a sense of integrity. In other words, they are “taking stock”
of their lives and wondering if they made good decisions based on the extenuating
circumstances. They are asking: Can I be proud of what I have done in my life?
Most psychologists agree that there are at least three major kinds of memory:
•   semantic memory (knowledge and facts, the seat of wisdom when making decisions
and judgments; it does not decline with age, rather it grows)
•   implicit memory (for skills one exercises automatically like speaking correctly
grammatically or hitting a golf ball; they are mental activities that occur spontaneously
without making an intentional effort; they do not decline either)
•   episodic memory (knowledge of specific events; it may decline but that could be
reversible)
Episodic memory is stable until the person reaches 60
years. At that point it may slowly decline but that may
be due to retirement and the fact that people don’t
usually exercise their mental faculties as much after
they stop working. Many people develop strategies
that compensate for the decline such as making lists,
leaving things in routine places, checking out memories
with others from time to time.
Here are some tips to sharpen your memory:
•   Pay attention and be interested in the first phases of learning something. Get it right
from the start!
•   Create links and associations between chunks of material. It is especially important to
anchor new data to information you already know.
•   Keep your mind challenged with stimulating activity. The nerve connections that assist
memory grow stronger with use.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
7777
7777
77
•   Concentrate on what you really need to remember, and don’t try to remember
everything.
•   Schedule frequent reviews and go over tricky information that you must know.
•   Memory aids can be helpful like lists, or a small notebook.
•   Pace yourself when learning so that you are not trying to cover too much data all
at once.
Thinking  Processes:  Reasoning
Reasoning is the cornerstone of good decision-making. Reasoning is the process of
forming conclusions, judgments, or inferences from facts or premises (the specific
examples that are used as a starting point). Before reasoning is used, we must have
cognition. Cognition means the act or process of knowing, understanding data; to
become conscious of something. The reasoning process may point us to a previous
answer, or a modification of earlier solutions, or a unique idea.
There are two types of reasoning: inductive and deductive. In each case the individuals
sort the information they have at hand in two different ways in order to reach a solution.
With inductive reasoning, the individual processes information by moving from
specific individual cases to general principles. The thinker is moving from the known to
the unknown. From the specific examples that are known to them, they formulate a
new hypothesis about what future observations may reveal. Inductive reasoning uses
repeated experience with a particular situation to draw a conclusion about all similar
situations. The truth of inductive reasoning depends on the accuracy of its premises.
Inductive reasoning involves relating pieces of information to each other through
association. For example, you examine a science textbook, dictionary, atlas, and
paperback novel. From these specific examples, you reach the general principle that
books are rectangular in shape and contain pages of printed material. You have used
inductive reasoning.
reasoning –
forming
judgements  and
conclusions from
facts that are
available
cognition –
knowing,
understanding,
being  conscious
of
inductive
reasoning – the
process of
beginning  with  a
number of specific
cases and
progressing  to
form a general
conclusion  or
observation
Inductive Reasoning
General Idea
Specific Cases

7878
7878
7 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The other type of reasoning is known as deductive reasoning. With deductive
reasoning, the individual processes information by moving from general principles to
specific cases or consequences. Deductive reasoning is essentially a matter of putting
two and two together. The general rule is tested on separate occasions and its
application to separate cases is judged. In order to make sense of our world, we notice
patterns in the way things happen. For example, you see a strange looking vegetable in
the supermarket and it is in the section marked “varieties of squash “. The general
characteristics that make it part of the squash family apply so you know this is a specific
variety of squash. You have used deductive reasoning. Another example: Your theory is
that all wild waterfowl migrate before winter To test your theory, you examine the case
of wild ducks, geese, and swans to find out what they do.
deductive
reasoning – the
process of
beginning  with  a
general
understanding  or
general  principle
and  applying  it  to
specific cases to
see if it holds true
In summary:
Inductive Reasoning:Observing specific instances to create general laws or
expectations.
Deductive Reasoning:Beginning with the general idea or the “big picture” and
applying that to specific cases.
Deductive Reasoning
General Idea
Specific Cases

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
7979
7979
79
Thinking  Processes:  Critical  Thinking
All thinking depends on knowledge. Provided we know enough, we are always
capable of critical thinking. But if we can make no sense of what we are trying to think
about, then critical thinking is impossible. Critical thinking is an attitude or frame of
mind rather than a skill. Critical thinking is a desire for or habit of determining the
authenticity, accuracy, and worth of information. Thinking critically is not a process we
switch on or off, but an inseparable part of thought on every occasion.
Critical thinkers must be ready to doubt, to challenge what is held to be true. The
opposite of a critical thinker is a passive individual who accepts whatever he/she is told.
A willingness to challenge ideas depends on a cluster of personal factors such as
perseverance, readiness to pause and reflect, openness to controversy, relationships with
other people, and image of oneself. Critical thinking challenges the status quo and
examines personal beliefs.
Critical thinking requires a sharp assessment
distinguishing between statements of fact and
statements of opinion. For example, a Labrador
retriever is a type of dog (fact); they are the most loyal
dog a person can own (opinion). Opinions may parade
as facts and so might intentional, outright lies. There is
no way we can distinguish facts and opinions except to
have a thorough knowledge of our own about the
subject.
Here are some of the key components of critical thinking.
Realization of a problem— The person is
confronted with a new situation. For example, there
is an important decision to be made about the future
and you must weigh the pros and cons of the
alternatives. Another example: You are perplexed by
conflicting accounts of the same incident or maybe
you are simply curious to know more about
something.

8080
8080
8 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Diagnosis or examination of the situation— What are the various ways in which you
may attack the problem? Examine each one carefully to see whether it is likely to lead
to a solution. Asking various questions and examining their possibilities occurs in the
diagnosis stage. This is a very important step. It can be approached from a variety of
strategies:
•   moving step by step toward your goal
•   looking at your problem from several new
angles
•   carefully judging the feasibility of an idea or
product
•   breaking your problem or idea into parts,
examining each part, and exploring how these
parts can be recombined in new ways
•   attacking a task from the perspective of the
desired solution
•   rearranging existing facts and coming up with
new insights on the subject
Forming a hypothesis— This stage is more than giving a guess about the right answer.
It is a possible explanation that seems worth examining at this stage to see whether
there is evidence supporting it, in which case we may accept it. For example, you have
a theory that sibling rivalry is more intense between two brothers than two sisters.
(Actually this hypothesis seems to be true most of the time.) If such evidence does not
exist, we try another hypothesis.
Testing the hypothesis— What would be the consequences if the guess were true?
Now the individual must employ logic and deduction.
Verifying the hypothesis— This is accomplished by checking the logical
consequences against the actual facts.
Under what circumstances can previous mental “baggage” get in the way of seeking
solutions? Some past experiences may obscure new solutions for the individual.
Sometimes previous solutions to a problem outlive their usefulness and are no longer as
appropriate or as efficient as they once were. An individual’s personal context can be
another problem. That means personal values and beliefs might “blind” us to certain
solutions.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
8181
8181
81
Functional fixedness may also creep in to entangle
the problem solvers efforts. Functional
fixedness means the inability to see new or
alternative uses for familiar objects. For
example, if you use a cast iron frying pan to
pound a nail into the wall, you have overcome
functional fixedness because you are using the frying
pan for a unique task.
functional
fixedness – the
inability  to  see
new or unique
uses for familiar
objects
Bag of Tricks for Critical Thinkers
- understanding the basic meaning of a statement
- evaluating if the line of reasoning makes sense
- discovering contradictions in statements
- judging if a conclusion is reasonable
- assessing if statements are specific enough
- judging whether a statement is reliable
- evaluating whether definitions are adequate
- being sensitive to new ideas, problems, and issues
- respecting novelty and intuition
- taking time to be reflective (mull over ideas)
- exploring ideas beyond what is presented
- remaining open-minded and deferring judgement
- producing many ideas with ease
- shifting perspectives to study a new angle
- adding details to enhance meaning and interest
- stepping outside the rules to create original ideas

8282
8282
8 2Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Thinking  Problems
Forgetting: Forgetting has usually been viewed as a more
complex, less easily understood phenomenon than
remembering. Forgetting is an active process; it is not a
passive one where we are simply the helpless victims of
memory loss. For example, you “forget” the time you
kicked a soccer ball into a big table full of food at the
family picnic. Memory not only reproduces what has been
stored, but it also produces information on its own, which
means that memory changes some of the data when it is
brought out of storage.
What causes forgetting to occur? First, forgetting is part of the normal memory system.
It’s nature’s defence against a bombardment of too much information. When the
necessary cues or stimuli required to recall the data are not supplied, the memory
remains lost. This does not mean that the information is permanently erased, just that it
will remain dormant until a very powerful stimulus can be used to activate memory.
Sometimes “forgotten” material may sink to unconscious levels, causing emotional
conflicts for the individual. For example, if a young child is molested, that awful
memory may be “forgotten” for many years. Occasionally, certain types of brain
surgery must be performed with the patient conscious but under partial anaesthetic.
When certain areas of the brain are touched with surgical instruments, long forgotten
memories are recalled by the patient.
Learning a new piece of information is hard work. It is a bit disheartening when we
forget some of the information we have learned in the past. These factors will have an
impact on the forgetting process.
Inattention: In some cases people do not give full attention to the learning situation in
the initial stages. The information is not properly anchored in the short term memory
enabling it to move into long term memory. Therefore because of inattention, they
never learn the material properly in the first place. In the final analysis, the quality of the
original learning can never be underestimated in promoting learning and detaining
forgetting.
Retroactive inhibition: It is the belief that what we have just learned may interfere
with previous learning. Retroactive inhibition seems to cause the greatest interference
when new learning is very similar to the original learning. Because the pieces of
information are so much the same, they get mixed together. For example, you are
memorizing a grocery list for this week and once that is complete, you decide to
memorize one for next week. You may have difficulty recalling the items from the first
week by themselves if there is a lot of overlap between the two lists.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
8383
8383
83
Proactive inhibition: It is the belief that previous learning may interfere with new
learning. The sequence of interference is reversed from that of retroactive inhibition.
The main idea in this theory is that the original learning is so powerfully fixed in the
mind that new data is less easily assimilated. For example, in English a certain letter like
‘j” has a particular sound. Then you study Spanish and find that the sound of ‘j’ is quite
different. You may make a lot of mistakes because your instruction in the English
language dominants what you are trying to learn in Spanish.
Motivated forgetting: Motivation to complete unfinished work has been well
documented. In one experiment a group of subjects was asked to work on a number of
simple tasks. Some tasks they were allowed to finish, others were interrupted by the
experimenter before the final stages. Later the subjects were asked to remember the
tasks they were doing and surprisingly they remembered more of the unfinished tasks.
What is the reason? One explanation would be that an individual becomes involved in a
task, creating motivation to complete the task at hand. The memory is sharpened by the
motivation (and frustration) of knowing there was something left undone that the
subject wishes another chance to do. The Zeigarnik effect is the theory that incomplete
tasks are remembered longer than completed tasks. They nag at our mind until we get
them done.
A later experiment cast some new light on incomplete tasks. Subjects were given a
number of tasks, some especially difficult to do, which invariably gave them trouble
and led to some anxiety. Subjects were interrupted when part way through the difficult
tasks. Later when asked to list the tasks they were doing, the subjects remembered less
of the difficult ones because these tasks had caused anxiety and the subjects had little
hope of completing them successfully anyway. In more general terms, if material to be
learned is associated with failure at a task, the ability to recall information is reduced.
By the same token, success at a task increases the ability to recall information. What
implications does this have for people who are in key positions structuring the learning
situation for others?
Zeigarnik effect –
the  theory  that
incomplete  tasks
are remembered
longer  than
completed  tasks

8484
8484
8 4Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Communication  Problems:  Dyslexia
The problem of dyslexia is the most common of all learning and communication problems. It
is estimated that about 10%-20% of the population have some form of dyslexia. It is more
likely to be a male condition by a ratio of 3:1. What does dyslexia mean? It comes from
the Latin word ‘dys’ which means bad or difficult; ‘lexia’ in Latin means language.
Dyslexia is not a thinking problem but rather a reading disability that has a carry-over
throughout the whole language program including: reading, writing, speaking and listening.
Dyslexia is not the result of brain damage or nerve damage. It is the product of a special
mode of thought and a natural reaction to confusion.
There are three different categories of dyslexia: visual, auditory and a combination of
the two. Visual is the most common. The dyslexic person is prone to be a tactile, hands on
person, which means that one must touch or feel objects or in many cases to be involved
with projects in a non-abstract way. Dyslexics may display some of the following
characteristics: delay in learning to talk, inadequate spoken language, difficulty in learning
and remembering printed words, reversal of some letters (b,d,p,q) or the order of letters in
words, reversal of numbers (very common), prolonged delay in establishing right/left
handedness, confusion about directions (right/left), difficulty in recalling a desired word
when speaking or writing, deficient skills in the mechanics and organization of written
composition, and/or cramped or illegible handwriting.
Restoring a person’s self-esteem is truly the most important part of undoing dyslexia
and other learning problems. If the dyslexic person is older, he or she has lived with
their failure longer and usually their self-esteem is pretty low. Labelling a child in the
absence of any formal diagnosis is especially harmful. The dyslexia specialist first looks
tor a large gap between math skills, performance skills, spelling, writing, and/or reading
skills. Dyslexics inherently perceive more and formulate mental  c o n c e p t s  faster
than other people. They excel in arts, architecture, engineering, strategy, and invention.
They can perceive imagination as reality. This form of intuitive thought is the
foundation of genius. Famous people with dyslexia: Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill,
Jackie Stewart (a racing driver), Tom Cruise, George Burns, Whoopi Goldberg, and
Cher.
K
h
7
4
dyslexia –
reading  disability
that  affects  all
language  skills
such as reading,
writing,  speaking,
and  listening

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
8585
8585
85
Concentration  Problems:  Attention  Deficit  Disorder
What is Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD)? It is characterized by a serious, persistent
difficulty with poor attention span, weak impulse control, and hyperactivity. Neurobiological
data indicates that ADD is deeply rooted in the central nervous system. A certain portion of
the brain is responsible for attention, handwriting, motor control, and inhibition responses.
The rate at which the brain uses glucose, its main energy source, was shown to be lower in
persons with ADD. However, no single factor has been established as being responsible for
triggering ADD.
This condition usually appears before seven years of age. It is far more prevalent in
males than females. ADD is often misunderstood as being willful misbehaviour, or lack
of effort at a task, or a refusal to take an interest in the world. Symptoms in 30-70% of
the patients continue into adulthood.
Here are a few of the symptoms of ADD:
•   fails to give close attention to details
•   often does not seem to listen
•   does not follow through with instructions
•   has difficulty organizing tasks
•   loses things
•   is easily distracted by outside stimuli
•   is forgetful of daily activities
•   fidgets
•   may talk excessively
•   may interrupt others
attention  deficit
disorder (ADD) –
poor  attention
span,  inability  to
concentrate  on
data for any
length of time,
accompanied  by
fidgeting,
restlessness

8686
8686
8 6Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesGeneral  Psychology  20
Children with ADD are vulnerable to failure in the two most important arenas for
developmental mastery—school and peer relations. ADD has often been inaccurately
portrayed as a type of specific learning disability. It is not. Children with ADD do not
have trouble learning. However, they do have difficulty performing in school due to poor
organization, impulsiveness, and inattention. Children with ADD do not routinely show signs
of serious emotional disturbances, but they may exhibit problems with self-esteem if not
properly treated.
Adults with ADD are often undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. This can lead to low self-
esteem, increased frustration, and educational failure. Years of struggling with ADD
might increase the risk of drug abuse and depression. Adults with ADD are restless,
easily distracted, have difficulty concentrating, are impulsive and impatient, and may be
short tempered, disorganized, and have career difficulties. Adults can benefit by
structuring their environment. For example, they can use an appointment book, tape
recorder, make a list of tasks, and learn time-management skills. They can eliminate
negative self-statements and enlist a friend to provide some constructive feedback.
Note:  Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) is also referred to as Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
8787
8787
87
Interrelating  Problems:  Autism
Autism is a neurological brain disorder in which behaviour, communication, and social
interactions are severely disrupted. Autism is caused by an underlying physical dysfunction
within the brain or central nervous system. The chief difficulty for a child with autism seems
to lie with processing information. The brain in autistic people doesn’t function normally and
the required messages about the outside world aren’t sent or are mixed up. So the world
and its signals are confusing to them.
Autism is a disorder one is born with; there is a genetic component at work. It is not
due to poor parenting skills. True autism shows up before the age of three. Symptoms
vary greatly from individual to individual. There are probably many mildly autistic
people who have never been diagnosed. People with autism fall within a range from
mild to severe. Social and communication skills can, in the severely autistic, be almost
nonexistent. In the early years some autistics show little interest in bonding with their
parents. They may resist being hugged and may want to avoid physical contact or even
eye contact. They don’t respond normally to the senses—sounds aren’t heard, words
carry no meaning, and background noise is deafening to them. They appear to
withdraw from sensory stimulation. Often anything outside the routine is threatening
and therefore, they resist environmental changes. They appear to withdraw from
sensory stimulation. Some will have inappropriate attachments to objects or carry out
obsessive or repetitive behaviours like rocking or head banging. Unfortunately, their
obsessive behaviour does not break the log jam of unexpressed emotions. Autistic
people pay little attention to many things, but overreact to others. They may appear not
to respond to injury or obvious danger. Autistic people will do such things as repeat
words back to people, have tantrums, or get extremely upset for no apparent reason.
They are sometimes picky eaters. They have strong preferences regarding clothing.
Most children with autism do not explore and seem to lack curiosity.
autism – a
neurological
disorder  affecting
communication
and  social
interaction  with
others

8888
8888
8 8Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
While autism is a lifetime condition, with
special training, supervision, and support,
many adults with autism can live and work in
the community. When treating autism, early
intervention is very important. If your child is
autistic, contact the local chapter of the
Autistic Society. Watch out for people
advertising miracle cures, or interventions that
don’t have a lot of hours one-on-one. Using
programs with intensive one-on-one therapy,
the child is constantly told to focus or pay
attention as some simple task is performed.
Sometimes these children develop strategies
to remind them to focus and pay attention like
pointing at the teacher to get them to look at
and concentrate on what the teacher is saying.
The autistic child may also have to be taught
appropriate gestures. For example, most
people ask the question, “Are you going over
there?”, and reinforce what they are saying by
pointing with their index finger The autistic
child must be taught these gestures. Watch out
for interventions that use any kind of aversion
or punishment, because the autistic child is
not a child who is being naughty. With an
intensive program, some autistic problems can
be reduced by the time a child attends school.
The  Element  of  Colour
We often dismiss colour as a superficial, unimportant element of our environment—
unlike thinking.
Colour has an impact on our lives and may even influence the quality of our thoughts.
Everyone has their favourite colours. What colour are your bedroom walls? What are
the dominant colours in your bedroom? What clothing colours attract you first when
you are shopping?
Colour has a definite impact on your mind, on your body, energy levels, health, and on
your mood. Light energy stimulates some of the glands of our body which regulate
hormones. Colour preferences are often affected by past memories, experiences, and
associations. To a large extent, our culture affects some of the colour choices we make.
In our culture, white stands for purity, but in Japan it is a colour associated with
mourning. Red is the bridal colour in both India and China.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
8989
8989
89
Our eyes see the colour, but our entire body senses it because blind people often have
very similar colour associations. Which colours promote thinking? Well, red stimulates
brain development in the early years of infancy, helping the brain make connections
between the two hemispheres. Yellow stimulates memory and is the colour that first
catches our attention. It has been reported to stimulate the left hemisphere of the brain.
The colour brown enhances conversation. Green helps us feel accepted and welcomed
(except for lime green which is too intense). Light blue has a calming affect, and
thinking related activities are best undertaken in an atmosphere of quiet tranquillity.
The number one colour choice for clothing across the population is blue. Blue is the
colour of authority and so is black. Black demands respect for its sense of power. For
example, many police uniforms are a shade of dark blue. In Canada, both the judge and
lawyers wear long, flowing black robes when they are in court. A common colour
dominating fast-food restaurants is orange because it stimulates the appetite. How many
fast food outlets can you think of with bright orange as a dominant colour?
Pink has some interesting effects on the body. A colour called bubble gum pink has
been used effectively in hospitals, drug centres, and prisons to calm people. It has been
reported that when left in a pink room for a long time, people get drowsy and may even
fall asleep. Pink is the beauty colour and has the effect of making foods taste sweeter to
us.
Think about the power of colour in some of the decisions you make. It is not
simply a secondary factor, it has more significance than you realize.

9090
9090
9 0Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  ProcessesADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Summary
This lesson was a challenging one. Here are some of the things we learned.
To summarize:
•   First memories usually begin about ages 4 or 5 when the child has developed
a language which helps to record memories.
•   The brain is a very complex organ which is changed by learning experiences
which are unique to each individual.
•   The brain analyzes information as it is presented, but also creates novel ideas
of its own.
•   The brain has 2 hemispheres, left and right, each with its own special abilities.
•   These experiences are linked to the right brain: looking at the whole picture,
intuition, feelings, creativity, visual awareness, and random processing of data.
•   These experiences are linked to the left brain: language, logical thought, verbal
expression, orderly and sequential processing of data.
•   Language uses symbols to convey meaning in the communication process.
•   Thinking is an essential implicit behaviour that organizes our reality and plans
in advance the activities we do.
•   Memory can be divided into three major types: sensory, motor-skill, and
verbal.
•   Our verbal memory system has two forms: short term which is the initial
and somewhat brief contact with the material, and long term which is the
data that is stored more permanently.
•   Reasoning is the process of forming judgments or conclusions from the
data we have at hand.
•   Inductive reasoning—the person begins with many specific examples and
reaches general conclusion.
•   Deductive reasoning—the person begins with a basic rule or principle and
tests it out with specific cases to see if the rule applies.
•   Critical thinking is not necessarily a set of skills but an attitude or desire to
determine the worthiness of an idea or concept.
•   Critical thinking occurs in these stages:—a problem is established, it is
studied regarding various possibilities, a hypothesis about a correct
solution is stated, tested, and verified.
•   Forgetting occurs when we have not properly and thoroughly learned
material in initial stages.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Two:    Learning  and  Cognitive  Processes
9191
9191
91
•   Forgetting is also possible with retroactive inhibition and proactive
inhibition.
•   We may be “motivated” to forget difficult tasks that are not completed, but
we are strongly motivated to finish incomplete tasks we know we can
handle.
•   Dyslexia is not a thinking problem, but rather a reading disability that
manifests itself in visual and auditory functioning.
•   Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) is not a problem with understanding
material as much as an inability to sustain concentration on a task for any
extended time.
•   Autism is a neurological disorder hampering communication and social
interaction with others.
•   Because autistic people have difficulty processing information about the
outside world, they retreat to an “inner world of their own where they
may engage in repetitive behaviours— rocking the body, staring at
objects, and following set routines.
•   Colours have an effect on our emotional state and have an impact on our
behaviours as well.
Turn to Assignment Booklet 3 and complete the assignments for this lesson.
A



ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
9393
9393
93
SS
SS
S
33
33
3
SS
SS
S
ECTIONECTION
ECTIONECTION
ECTION
TT
TT
T
HREEHREE
HREEHREE
HREE
Studying  Behaviour
Lesson 1: Roles and Group Influence
Overview
In the first part of this lesson you will examine what roles are and how they influence
our behaviour. Since human beings are social animals, the influence of others is a major
focus of the later part of this lesson. Groups of one kind or another play a tremendous part
in shaping our attitudes, our thoughts, and ultimately our behaviour.

9494
9494
9 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Lesson 1 will focus on these topics:
•   What is a Role?
•   How Do Roles Differ in Nature?
•   How Are Roles Learned?
•   What is Androgyny?
•   What Causes Role Conflicts?
•   How Role Changes Lead to Improvements
•   Rites of Passage and Birth Order
•   How Important is the Group?
•   Our Membership in the Family
•   Peer Groups and Their Influence
•   Group Classification
•   Group Decisions and Influences
•   Leadership
•   Small Group Dynamics – Communication and Unity
•   Negative Side of Groups
•   Being Outside the Group – Dealing with Bullies, Unemployment
•   Positive Side of Groups
•   Winning With People
What  is  a  Role?
This famous quotation should be familiar to you:
“All the world’s a stage
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts.”

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
9595
9595
95
Since the first part of your lesson focuses on the topic of roles, it is important to begin
with a clear understanding of the meaning of the term role. It may be defined as “a part,
a character, or a function which is taken or assumed by anyone”. Therefore a role
involves action, behaviour, and activities.
Have you ever taken an objective look at some of your actions and felt that you were really
“performing” or acting out a part? For example, did you get carried away with your feelings
of anger and punch the wall just like one of the tough guys on a TV show? In a romantic
situation, did you use more loving phrases than you had intended as your partner kept telling
you what a great person you were? When roles are brand new to us, we may imitate the
way someone else has handled that role until we understand all the ins and outs of the role
and feel completely comfortable with it.
Another observation that can be made about roles is that they are assumed. We may
take up a new role, or decide we want to cast aside a role. We can put on and take off
some roles like an article of clothing. Clothing is still very real and recognizable even
though a person is not wearing the garment. Roles have a life of their own too, even
when someone is not performing the role at that particular moment. For example, the
members of the town council decide they need someone to play the role of fire chief
because the last one retired from that position two weeks ago. Another example: you
might have had the role of the neighbourhood prankster for a few years. Lately, you
have settled down and become more “refined,” but you can always revert to the role of
neighbourhood joker whenever you choose.
Just as your wardrobe will have many different kinds of clothes for you to wear, so a
person may put on and take off many different kinds of roles. In fact, comparing clothes
to roles is a good one because the clothes we wear will have a definite impact on our
behaviour and therefore on our roles. For example, what you wear to a Saturday night
party is quite different from what you might wear to church. Your roles in the two
situations are quite different. That’s why attending a social function inappropriately
dressed can cause everyone to feel uncomfortable; it is more than just having the wrong
clothing—it also means you have incorrectly defined your role for that occasion. A
person might have many different roles during his/her lifetime.
role – the
behaviour  pattern
one assumes, or
the character one
plays

9696
9696
9 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
When choosing a role, a person doesn’t have the option of adding and deleting from the
role as they choose. One accepts the role as a package deal. Certain restrictions, benefits
and responsibilities come with any role that a person must be willing to assume. For
example, you cannot decide to be a good friend to someone but prefer not to lend a hand to
the person or offer them any emotional support in the tough times. Roles are sets of
expectations that are prescribed for a person. If a person steps outside of the established
rules regarding that role, they risk the possibility of being labelled deviant. A deviant is
someone who displays inappropriate behaviour. Sometimes deviant behaviour is not proper
(but harmless) like purposely wearing a T-shirt with a nasty message to your graduation
ceremonies. Sometimes deviant behaviour can be harmful, immoral, illegal and vicious. For
example, when the referee at one international soccer match called a bad game, he was shot
to death by a fanatical fan. Another example of a milder form of deviance: you are a parent
to a young child; that is an extremely, important role. You decide you don ‘t want to give
guidance and direction to the child but would prefer to be “best friends” instead of acting
like a parent.
Roles are interdependent behaviour patterns. Roles exist in an interlocking system or
network. You have one role that must intermesh with several other roles in order that
things will go smoothly. Some deviations in roles are critical because they can upset the
whole system and throw it into chaos. For example, if you are a cashier at a department
store, that is one of your roles. Someone else plays the role of a customer and expects
you to record their purchase, take their money or credit card, and package the item. If
you do not provide service to the customer (unless the reason is a legitimate one), your
boss will want to know why you are jeopardizing the system. Another example: You
are a teenage son or daughter—certain chores are assigned to you. Your parents have
roles as well that are part of the network of family obligations.
deviant – a
person  who
displays
inappropriate
behaviour
interdependent –
the  connections
people  have  with
each  other

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
9797
9797
97
Every social relationship is defined by being a set or a pair of roles. Reciprocity is the
key word when studying the obligations of a relationship. Roles operate on a delicate
balance of inputs and outputs. Cooperation is the key. What is one partner’s obligations
is the other person’s right. Every member of a system is assigned certain tasks. At the
same time the person is entitled to receive services from others in return for the
contributions the person has made. In this way, relationships have a personal value in
satisfying one’s own goals. For example, as a student, you expect your assignments to be
read by the teacher and that you will receive useful feedback. The reciprocal role of your
teacher involves the expectation that you will remain on topic when answering questions and
that you will phrase your ideas in a readable form.
Some roles are well defined. These roles are usually related to a specific occupation and
have a “job description” detailing what is expected of the person. The role of a friend,
or a daughter, or a sports fan are more vague roles. They are open to a wide range of
interpretations as to what is appropriate or expected. The obligations which are a part of
these roles are also less definite. Some misinterpreted roles may be harmless, even
humourous; at other times role alterations can be deviant in nature.
reciprocal – two
components
operate with a
balance  of  give
and  take

9898
9898
9 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
How  Do  Roles  Differ  In  Nature?
There are four basic criteria involved in the description of roles. Sex, age, kinship and
common residence are factors which are important in defining many of our roles in life.
Roles: Sex
All human societies follow certain rules when it comes to assigning tasks that are
appropriate for each of the sexes. The rules for “correct” sexual roles vary from one
society to the next.
In modern, industrial societies, the sexual division of labour for everyday household
duties varies from family to family. In some households, both spouses share duties
interchangeably. In other cases, the male does outside work and the female does inside
chores. In peasant or tribal societies where the household has the added burden of
producing goods for market, then the division of labour by sex is usually dictated by a
list of do’s and don’t’s.
Let’s visit a husband and wife in a primitive Bushman society to see how they organize
their daily activities. Their extremely harsh environment makes it imperative that each
person strictly follow his or her role obligations. To deviate from their organized
division of labour could put their survival in jeopardy.
You can observe how these activities are interdependent and reciprocal. Each person
has a clear understanding of what duties are expected of each one according to sex.
There is cultural variation in the practice of assigning roles to men and women. Here are
some interesting examples illustrating cultural variation in the tasks assigned to men and
women.
seituDs'efiWseituDs'dnabsuH
•nerdlihcehtrofserac•stiurfdnastoorstcelloc
•retlehsylimafehtsdliub•slaminastnuh
•doofseraperp•sniksmorfgnihtolcsekam
•retawdnadoowstcelloc•skcitserif,snopaewsekam
•gninruberifehtspeek•erifehtstrats
•naelcpmacehtspeek•sreniatnocnedoowegralsekam
•stnemanrosekam•eporstsiwt

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
9999
9999
99
Hopi Indians:Women do house building and look after house repairs. Men spin
and weave cloth to make clothing for both men and women.
Navaho Indians:    Men weave ceremonial garments. Women do the everyday spinning
and weaving.
Zulu Tribe:Women work in the fields, planting and harvesting the grain. Men
look after the cattle.
Nuer Tribe:Men herd the cattle. Women are the only ones who are allowed to
milk the cattle.
These examples indicate that many roles that men and women are assigned cannot be
explained in terms of differences in the physical characteristics of the sexes. Many roles
are assigned arbitrarily to each sex by their culture. That means there is no clear
reasons for the choices that are made; the roles seem to be sorted in a random way. In
some cultures strong superstitions enforce the decisions about who is allowed to do
what. But before we pass judgment on these people for being narrow-minded, are we
really any different when we find it hard to picture a woman dentist?
Nevertheless, in our society we are gradually breaking away from the strict division of
roles—one for men and one for women. Women seem more flexible about breaking old
barriers and moving into areas of work that were once considered for “men only”. Why
do you think men are more reluctant to assume new tasks that were once viewed as
“women’s work”? To answer that question we have to understand the concept of
status. Status refers to one’s position of importance.
The status of men has always been higher
than the status of women. Women have
never been given dominance over men
(except for rare cases where an individual
woman has become ruler for unusual
reasons). How a society determines the
status of the sexes remains a mystery. Men’s
higher status is not based on the fact that
they make a more significant contribution to
survival because in many cases that is
clearly the women’s role. In some societies
the status of the two sexes approaches
equality; other times the men remain
dominant.
status – position
of  authority  and
respect

100100
100100
1 0 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Two universal rules apply to all cultures. In all societies the rearing of infants is the
speciality of women. In all societies the primary police or military force which is used
to preserve order is provided by men who are specially trained to use weapons. Outside
of these two principles, there are a number of different rules and variations when it
comes to roles regarding the sexes.
Roles: Age
Age is a significant factor when determining the status of roles. The child’s role
responsibilities gradually increase with age until the person finally reaches adult status.
Then, slowly the status of one’s role declines as old age approaches and the elderly lose
power and prestige in the society. For example, some seniors complain that people
don’t appreciate the hardships and contributions seniors have made to the progress of
our society.
Transitions from one age category to another aren’t very smooth or clear at times. Many
teenagers complain that some days they are treated like children by their parents, and
other times they are expected to act as adults. For example, a sixteen year old girl feels
bitter about the fact that she is expected to assume full adult responsibilities in preparing
supper alone. Yet when she goes out with her friends, her parents try to impose a
10:00 p.m. curfew as if she were a young child.
The seniors in our society are also disturbed by their status which relates to the age
factor. One day they are an active, productive member of the work-force. Then, they
reach retirement age and are pushed to the sidelines. Being old is not considered a
glamorous or a significant role. In primitive societies the elderly are made to feel
special. They are treated as intellectuals and have a definite place in decision-making
matters.
Primitive cultures help their people make the
transition from one role to the next based on the age
factor by having distinct age/responsibility
designations. Our modern conveniences blur the
lines clarifying when a child attains the full status of
adulthood. For example, a seventeen year old has
driving privileges but yet this young person still lives
at home under the watchful eye of mom and dad. An
elderly person exercises, eats well, has the benefit of
modern medicines as well as cosmetics and hair
dyes. Therefore grandma might look and feel like a
fifty year old when she is really closer to seventy-
five. A very interesting example of modern
procedures that confuses the age roles is the fact
that modern medicine has helped a few women who
are in their fifties and early sixties give birth to
children.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
101101
101101
101
Roles:  Kinship and Common Residence
In recent years, kinship roles have undergone a dramatic change. A person’s kin are people
who are related to the person by birth, through family lines. In pioneer times, the extended
kinship group was very common consisting of parents, children, grandparents, aunts,
uncles and cousins. However, in our modern society, people are very mobile and the kin
group is no longer as prominent as it had once been. The nuclear family consisting of
parents and children is a more streamlined unit. Often the nuclear family lives far away from
any relatives. Think of an important decision you or your family have made in the past six
months. A nuclear family makes its own decisions with no input from outside sources unless
the family seeks advice from friends, counsellors, or professional consultants. In pioneer
times, grandparents, aunts and uncles would all voice an opinion.
Before you decide that it is so much better to enjoy independence through the nuclear
family, remember that many years ago if someone was sick or experiencing financial
distress, all the relatives were there to offer support. Without the extended kin, we often
call upon close friends to act as kin. Some of the help given by the extended kin must
now come from social programs sponsored by the government, the church, or the
community.
In troubled financial times, grandparents may find grown sons and daughters are
moving back home temporarily because they are unable to live independently.
Sometimes grandparents are asked to raise grandchildren which puts them in the role of
being parents once again.
Family or kinship roles have taken some very interesting twists and turns. New
relationship patterns are evolving all the time.
extended kinship
– all the relatives
outside the circle
of the immediate
family
nuclear family –
mother,  father,
and  children

102102
102102
1 0 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
How  Are  Roles  Learned?
One of the first things that must be clarified is that not all
roles are learned. Some roles are ascribed. An ascribed
role is one that is given to someone automatically, with no
effort on the person’s part. For example, Queen
Elizabeth II plays the role of queen because it was
conferred upon by inheritance.
Another example: you are automatically a son or a
daughter to your parents. You do not have to learn the
role or practise it; you receive that role the moment
you are born.
Other roles are classified as achieved roles. They are acquired by the person through hard
work, ambition and merit. For example, the role a Prime Minister or President is an
achieved one.
In summary, roles can be sorted into two categories. Ascribed roles are those which people
are given automatically. Achieved roles must be attained through competition and individual
effort. In a more progressive society, achieved status is more important. Why is this true?
Any society needs bright and talented people in key positions of leadership in order to surge
ahead. When a society is allowed to choose the most capable people instead of giving
someone the position based on inheritance, then the society is in the best position to make
positive choices for its future success.
So our achieved roles are the ones that are learned. But the question is: How are they
learned? Socialization during childhood acquaints us with our roles. This process refers
to the notion that we develop clear ideas of what is appropriate behaviour and what
isn’t accepted. We begin by learning how our families expect us to behave, and later
understand the expectations of our society as a whole. Ideas about proper behaviour
become internalized or engrained within the person to the point that we automatically
accept these rules as being the truth.
Parents and family are an important source of knowledge about roles. Playmates, the
education system, the church, and the mass media are some of the other significant
contacts that will define roles and help the individual learn those roles. The process of
identifying and imitating roles is simple and straight forward. A role is shown in a
favourable way. If the appeal is great enough, the role will be imitated. People are fairly
impressionable when it comes to accepting new roles. For example, a little girl sees her
mother hold and cuddle the baby and provide for its care. She may copy this behaviour
with her doll. Later she will extend this role by caring for younger siblings.
ascribed role – a
position  given
automatically  at
birth
achieved role – a
position  given  on
the basis of merit
and  competence
socialization –
the process of
learning  the
appropriate
values  and
behaviours  of  the
society

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
103103
103103
103
One of the most important tasks we learn regarding our roles in life is gender identity.
Do we label ourselves as being male or female? Will we look at life from the
perspective of a female or a male? The child begins with self-labelling, that is
understanding his or her own sex label by three years of age. Clothing and hair styles
(as well as noticing a loose cluster of physical characteristics) are the main criteria the
child uses in determining the gender identity of others. This task may seem very simple
but with unisex hair and clothing styles, the young child has to make some fine
distinctions. The development of a stable gender identification is usually completed by
the age of five. Gender identity is distinctive in being the most stable and unchanging of
all social identities. It is a very important developmental task which directs and modifies
all of the person’s other activities throughout life.
We have often used the terms maleness-femaleness and masculinity-femininity. Is there
a difference between them? The answer is a definite “yes”. Maleness and femaleness
are based on biological makeup of the body. Physical sexual characteristics
(reproductive organs) are different and hormonal makeup is different. Masculinity and
femininity are determined by our cultural perspective. Each culture has its own notion
of what is masculine and what is feminine behaviour. Because masculinity and
femininity are not determined genetically, they can be
expressed in a wide variety of ways.
Our definitions of masculinity and femininity are derived
directly from the roles and duties that are assigned to
each sex during parenthood. We assume everyone will
ultimately become a father or a mother. However,
nowadays approximately 50% of all married couples do
not become parents. In the past, the biological nature of
our reproductive functions determined the division of
labour for the sexes. Males were dominant, more
mobile, and protective. Females were passive, sedentary,
and nurturant. Does the biologically determined division
of labour between the sexes still apply as strongly as before?
In our society, what constitutes masculine and feminine behaviour? Boys were raised to
pattern themselves after these traits: physical aggression, dominance, competence at
athletics, achievement, competitiveness, and independence. The traits favoured for girls
included: dependence, passivity, inhibition of physical aggression, competence at
language skills, politeness, social poise, and neatness. How will these perceptions of
each sex have an impact on roles? From these lists it may be concluded that our society
tends to prescribe a role for women that entails less competence and maturity than the
role prescribed for men.
gender identity –
the  person
establishes if they
are male or
female

104104
104104
1 0 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Practically all psychological and aptitudinal differences reported between the sexes can
be explained by cultural factors rather than inborn differences. Therefore, males are
raised to emulate male-valued traits and are rewarded for such behaviours. Females are
conditioned to favour female-valued traits. Can you think of some examples where
these prescribed rules are too restrictive? What happens to the person who follows his
or her own interests despite these rules?
What  Causes  Role  Conflicts?
There are two basic reasons for role conflicts. One is that roles are misunderstood. During
the socialization process, the person is not properly shown the duties and responsibilities of
the role. Or, people view the role but chose to interpret it differently.
A more common reason for role conflicts is that society changes and so do our roles. The
person does not remain up-to-date with what is considered appropriate behaviour.
Nowadays children and young adults are allowed more freedom and given more
opportunities. Those facts can raise the potential for role conflicts.
Constant change and rapid progress have contributed to
the generation gap. The basis of the generation gap is
differences in values and perspectives which leads to
difficulty in communicating between different age levels.
The end result is lack of understanding which goes both
ways. Our permissive society results in more lax ideas of
discipline. This in turn causes children and young
people to be more questioning of authority. Can you
think of some examples of how these changes lead to
more role conflicts within the family?
During the course of their upbringing, children are being exposed to many different
institutions. When many different institutions share parenting responsibilities, a conflict of
standards is inevitable. For example, the school and the home may be at odds with each
other over the proper handling of the child. The child then believes adult standards about
roles are ambiguous.
The mass media is another source of role conflict between parent, child and society.
The mass media may portray certain lifestyles in a favourable light which can lead to
strong disagreement from the parents.
generation gap –
having  different
values, ideas and
perspectives  than
people who are
older or younger

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
105105
105105
105
Let’s briefly examine some of the role conflicts which may occur during dating and
courtship.
Here are some comments from young women.
Comment One:It was embarrassing for me when I was academically superior to my
boyfriend. Consequently, we never discussed school marks, and
sometimes I would ask him to explain the math assignment even
though I knew how to do it.
Comment Two:My mother told me to lay off the brains on dates if I liked my date
enough for him to become a “steady”.
Comment Three:Boys fear girls who make decisions so I always let my boyfriend
choose a movie or a restaurant although I sometimes feel I could
make a better choice.
Comment Four:My field was scuba diving; my boyfriend was a health food nut. I
frequently steered the conversation toward “his” topic of health
foods to boost his ego and build his sense of security.
How do you react to such remarks? If you are a girl or woman, have you ever been
involved with this game? Do you believe it is wrong or can you justify it? If you are a
boy or a man, do you feel threatened by a member of the opposite sex who is more
capable than you in certain areas? Or are you more angry at a girl for creating a lie
about her true talents? If dating and courtship are based on staged behaviour, are role
conflicts inevitable when the permanent marriage union is established?

106106
106106
1 0 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
What  Is  An  Androgyny?
Earlier we learned that our gender identity is the foundation of our perspective on life. We
also learned that sex roles are sorted into two piles—one for men and one for women. Is it
possible to have a less rigid attitude toward our sex roles?
The term androgyny is a combination of andro-male and gyne-female. It removes the
stereotypes we have for each sex and allows people the opportunity to combine the best
traits of both men and women. Traditional concepts of masculinity and femininity put
limitations on a person’s behaviour and how they can express themselves.
In our society an adult must be independent, assertive and self reliant. However,
traditional femininity frowns on women behaving in such a way. In addition, an adult
must be sensitive, caring, and attuned to emotional needs. Traditional masculinity keeps
men away from expressing these personal needs. Androgyny combines the best of both
abilities. It allows adults to be independent yet sensitive; they can be assertive yet open
to the wishes of others; in other words, they can be both masculine and feminine.
Androgyny facilitates a superior standard of psychological health for the sexes. It
unburdens people from sets of narrow views and narrow behaviours. Androgyny
expands the horizons of both men and women. It permits people to cope effectively
with a wide range of situations.
How does androgyny translate into actual role behaviours or activities? For example,
androgyny means a man can arrange a business deal on his own, vacuum the family
room, cuddle his children and read them bedtime stories, and do the family laundry. For
example, androgyny means a woman can change the oil in her car, bake a casserole for
someone who has been ill, and mow the lawn. Since many of the activities of men and
women now overlap because of androgyny, it should give both sexes a better
understanding and appreciation of each other.
androgyny –
combining  both
male and female
traits  and
capabilities

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
107107
107107
107
How  Can  Role  Changes  Lead  To  Improvements?
Nowadays it is very common to find women employed outside the home. Men are assuming
more household chores than they did in the past. How eager are both sexes to take on
new duties? On the average, men do not want to change as much as women do. Since
men generally have higher status roles, they gain little by the change and they do not
see the need for change as readily.
Today more women are pursuing high
status careers, but few men are clamouring
for the position of full time homemaker.
Because of our socialization, our first
reaction to the male homemaker will likely
be negative. However, some men are terrific
cooks, great domestic planners, and are very
patient and understanding with children.
Some women make superb business
administrators. Modern companies and
businesses must be more people-friendly. The
Female Advantage means that feminine
qualities bring valuable perspectives to the
management of these businesses. The old
system focused on hierarchical structures
which were goal-oriented and power based
following the masculine view. Women often
manage people in a collegial way. They
gain ideas through consensus which means
power is shared by getting good opinions from all employees.
In addition, women employees may set a positive example for men on how to integrate
work and family. Women’s increasing presence in the business field may encourage such
positive changes as: more job-sharing, more flexible work hours, and parental leave of
absence for both men and women. Rather than precipitating role conflicts, the working
mother can be a potential catalyst for a deeper understanding of the roles of husband and
wife through shared obligations.
When people become too comfortable, they may begin to stagnate and turn their backs on
change. Role conflicts can arise because people are not willing or not able to change when
the time is right to do so. The obstacles interfering with change are: outdated values, lack of
ability to adjust, and uncorrected mistakes which have been passed on by previous
generations. When conflict leads to change, people are motivated to examine their roles
more carefully and seek ways of bringing about change for the sake of growth.

108108
108108
1 0 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Role conflicts can produce some useful changes. They may cause us to examine our
priorities and our values. They may make us more aware of injustices. The result might
be a breakdown of restricted and outdated habits that are not allowing people to
progress and find their real areas of growth and achievement.
Rites of Passage
The term rites of passage refers to an initiation or a “test” that a person must pass to gain
membership and acceptance in a new role. The basic idea behind such a concept is that
roles are very special. You must prove yourself worthy to meet the obligations of the role
before you are allowed to accept it. It also gives people a stronger sense of belonging to the
group if membership is not automatically granted but rather you must endure some hardship
to reach that goal.
Some primitive tribes have a set initiation rite that we may view as being barbaric.
Young men or young women must endure physical pain and sometimes mental or
psychological anguish to prove that they will be worthy adult members of the tribe.
Once the initiation is over, they are accepted by everyone as full adults, with all the
privileges of that position.
In our society, we have many turning points in our lives where we may be subjected to
a similar experience. Often when students enter high school, they may have to endure
various froshing activities. Senior students may demand the freshman students must do
some embarrassing or humiliating act to emphasize they are just rookies in the system
and must earn respect before they become full-fledged members. Sometimes these
activities are fun and harmless; at other times they may become hazing which means
serious bullying and intimidation.
Commonly when people want to join a new club, there is some form of initiation or
welcome as well. Rites of passage give us a sense of achievement and a sense of
belonging to the group, but they should not become vicious or physically dangerous.
rites of passage –
attaining  the
status of full
membership after
enduring  an
initiation
procedure

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
109109
109109
109
Birth Order
The family unit is very important for socialization which teaches us the roles we need to
live successfully in society. Each family is unique for a number of reasons. One reason
is the number of children in each family and the arrangement of the boy-girl pattern as
well as age gaps between children. Your place in the family has a great impact on who
you are.
Some people believe that each position in the family produces a child with a common
pattern of characteristics.
First Born:They are high achievers. They like to do well both academically and
athletically. They are responsible and dominant. Parents have very
high expectations for these children which pushes them to do well at
all tasks. Therefore they are conforming and adult-oriented.
Middle Children:These children are sometimes labelled the forgotten children
because they don’t have the special recognition of the first or last
born. They are peacekeepers or mediators in the family because
they see problems from both the perspective of oldest and
youngest. They are outgoing, friendly, and social.
Last Born:They are often cute, charming and special. They can be
disorganized and don’t like the responsibility of making
decisions. They have developed good social skills. They seek
more friendships outside the family as older siblings become
independent and leave home.
Only Children:They will have many characteristics of first-borns, but do not
have patience.

110110
110110
1 1 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The boy-girl pattern of siblings have an influence on their behaviour. If the oldest child
is a girl, followed by three brothers, the oldest boy who is really a middle child may
exhibit the characteristics of an oldest child since he will be the leader of his two
younger brothers.
A gap between the siblings of 5 years or more is considered significant. Consider a family
that has two children, followed by a break of 8 years and then has two more children. The
oldest child of the second group of children may act as the oldest child. By the same token
the youngest child of the first set of children may act as the youngest since they have been
the “baby of the family” for a long stretch of 8 years.
These theories about birth order, family status, and roles give us some interesting ideas
for speculation!

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
111111
111111
111
How  Important  Is  The  Group?
We assume that people value groups whether it be the family, friendships, clubs, the
community, or our society as a whole. But let’s begin by questioning whether this is a valid
assumption.
Just how important is group contact for human beings? Suppose an individual commits a
serious crime not accepted or tolerated by society. Punishment means removal from society
by incarceration. In prison further misbehaviour follows. What, then, is the ultimate form of
punishment? Solitary confinement. Depriving people of contact with other human beings
through isolation or shunning is considered a very serious type of reprimand.
It is important to study the special control a group exerts over individual behaviour. Groups
are assumed to have characteristics different from merely the sum of the collective
characteristics of their individual members. Group behaviour is unique. In some respects a
small group is like a miniature replica of the larger society.
Social motives are very important in controlling individual behaviour. There are no limits to
what length some people will go in order to gain social approval including killing someone,
or enduring humiliation, pain, or death. Many of our highly valued activities are undertaken,
not for their own sake, but as instrumental steps in getting other people to notice,
appreciate, help, love, or honour us.

112112
112112
1 1 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Our  Membership  In  The  Family
The process by which people learn to live in harmony with themselves, with others and with
their culture is called socialization. The family is the first and the most important group
involved in the process of socialization. Perhaps the most essential aspect of socialization is
the development of a conscience—the ability to distinguish between right and wrong. The
conscience is the basic tool people require for positive interactions with others in group
situations.
The formation of the conscience is part of our moral development. The home is a major
contributor. Along with a conscience, the family teaches its members important lessons
about having concern for the welfare of others and respecting the rights of others. The family
has the first, the most basic, and the greatest influence on the socialization of a child.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
113113
113113
113
peer – someone of
the same rank or
standing
reference group –
a group of people
who have similar
beliefs  and  values
Lesson Three:  Peer Groups and Their Influence
A peer is a person of the same rank or
standing and is often of the same age. A
peer is an equal. A common concern of
parents is the influence of peers on their
child’s actions and values. Many parent-
child arguments centre around the child’s
choice of friends. Parents become
particularly anxious if they feel their child is
giving up parental standards and adopting
peer standards instead.
We usually compare ourselves to others
who are similar to us in their beliefs and
values. These persons are said to be our
reference group. For example, your
reference group may be your classmates or
your athletic teammates. Sometimes we use
as reference groups those groups in which
we actually have membership. Sometimes
we use groups in which we wish we
belonged. How much of our behaviour is
influenced by the groups depends on how
important it is to us to identify with our
reference group or maintain membership.
We are attracted to people who are
reflections of ourselves or who represent
what we would like to be.
Young people find security in relationships with others their own age. With the support of the
peer group, the individual can move from parental control to more self control. The peer
group assists the individual in obtaining personal evaluation that is objective without family
biases. Within the peer group, the individual is compared to friends of equal ability not to
brothers and sisters. Peers provide the individual with a social setting in which social
behaviour can develop. The individual can feel secure in discussing a variety of sensitive
topics with peers. They discover friends may have similar feelings and thus feel less guilty
and awkward about their own feelings.
Identifying with a group allows the individual to share in whatever prestige and power the
group possesses. Some persons are so lacking in self-confidence that even the slightest
approval or disapproval from others will get them to act in a particular way. The group has a
tremendous influence.

114114
114114
1 1 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
crowd – a
flexible
gathering  of
people  with
common goals
and  purposes
Group  Classification
Groups can be classified in a number of ways depending on the purpose and perspective of
the group. Let’s look at a number of factors.
The Crowd
During mid-adolescence the crowd becomes the most important avenue of contact. The
crowd is a group of people of homogeneous or similar age grouping. Members of both
sexes are represented. The crowd has a strong feeling of togetherness and a sense of
community spirit among its members. Friendships are flexible among crowd members with
the length of friendship varying from person to person. The crowd leader is regarded as a
model or reference person for all crowd members. The crowd is a loose collection of
individuals who come together to engage in mutually beneficial activities. The crowd is not
bound by strong group pressures or to rigid norms. The crowd is a temporary gathering of
people responding to a common stimulus or focus and possibly engaging in some form of
collective behaviour. For example, if a group of students gather in the gym during noon
hours to make stage settings for the spring play, they may be classified as a crowd. Another
example: the students of Central High School meeting in the gym for a general assembly
would be considered a crowd.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
115115
115115
115
clique – a group
structured  around
class lines with
strict control over
its members
in group – the
group to which a
person  belongs
out group – the
people  outside  of
one’s group
The Clique
The clique is a group of people with special, distinguishing features. The clique is usually
quite small in numbers. The clique is structured around class lines. The higher the class, the
more strict are the controls surrounding admission to the clique. The clique is more cohesive
than the crowd, and its profile is more clearly defined. The clique meets some important
goals for its members. The clique may aid the young person in developing an acceptable sex
role in the society. The clique is a means whereby the members establish significant social
relationships in the society. Membership in the clique gives the individual status and a sense
of worth. For example, a clique would be a group of students who form a Music
Appreciation Club. The clique’s power and authority would be strengthened if it enforced
the rules that only people who regularly attended the symphony or opera could join.
Another example: you work in a large office—a small group of people in your department
form a close-knit group that sticks together for work and social functions.
In Groups and Out Groups
In general, a person identifies with and builds strong links to their in group. Anyone outside
those boundaries is known as the out group. Obviously in groups and out groups are
different for every individual. Under some circumstances the boundaries of the in and out
group will be strictly guarded to block the entry of new members. If conflict or competition
arises between various in groups, then rigid controls will also be enforced. Here is an
interesting illustration that could apply to any group of people. For example, students collect
in a variety of groups during the noon hour. Students move from one group to another to
engage in casual conversation. Then one day the school administration advertises a poster
competition for a special prize. Students may work on the project in groups during the noon
hour At that point, in and out groups will likely become established and strictly enforced.
Each group of students won’t want anyone else to invade their boundaries and steal their
ideas. In group members will work together on the poster; out group members will be
excluded.

116116
116116
1 1 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
inclusive group –
group’s aim is to
expand
membership and
to include more
people
task-oriented
group – group’s
aim is to perform
a specific job
interaction-
oriented group –
group’s aim to
provide  social
contacts
Inclusive /Exclusive Groups
Both of these categories centre around the way the group’s membership is determined.
An aim of the inclusive group is to expand activities and include more people. Small
inclusive groups tend to change over time as they expand in numbers and grow into
larger groups. For example, many church groups are inclusive groups because they
seek to expand membership to include new members.
An aim of the exclusive group is to limit
membership to those of special status or who meet
certain prescribed requirements. They are elite
groups that often insist on initiation or other
ceremonies prior to the granting of full membership.
The more difficult the initiation, the more valuable
membership in the group is perceived to be.
Members of exclusive groups may wear special
clothing, jewellery, badges, or pins to separate them
from nonmembers. Some exclusive groups demand
that new members must be sponsored by an
existing member. For example, the country club,
the yacht club, or the police force would be
exclusive groups.
Task Oriented/Interaction Oriented Groups
Both of these categories centre around the purpose of the group. The main purpose of the
task-oriented group is to perform a specific job. For example, the yearbook club has the
specific task of publishing a school yearbook. Another example: the staff at a day care are
task-oriented because their purpose is the care and supervision of the children who attend
the day care.
The main purpose of the interaction-oriented group is to foster opportunities for social
contacts or interaction. For example, a number of people in the community decide to get
together every Thursday night for a volleyball match. After a couple of games, they have a
social time. Another example: people gather at a nightclub to listen to the music, dance and
enjoy themselves; they are interaction-oriented.
Many groups will be a combination of task and interaction-oriented. For example, a weight
loss group will have a specific task of getting members to lose weight (task-oriented) and it
is also a social support system for members (interaction-oriented). Another example: the
members of a church will have the dual purpose of being both task and interaction-oriented.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
117117
117117
117
group dynamics –
relationships  and
interactions
experienced
within  the  group
social power –
control  within  the
group to bring
about  changes
social influence –
the way group
thoughts  and
behaviours
change  through
group  contacts
external locus of
control – a belief
that one is
controlled  by
outside  factors
internal locus of
control – the
belief  that  self
determination
shapes one’s
destiny
Group  Decisions  and  Influences
Group dynamics refers to interpersonal relationships that develop between individuals
within the group. The ways in which small groups form is significant. Social power which is
held by the individual or the group has the potential for precipitating changes. Social
influence is the term which describes the actual formation and change of attitudes, opinions,
and behaviours through group contact and interaction. If group cohesion and group loyalty
are fairly well established, the group will have considerable influence on its membership.
How is it possible for a group to influence the behaviour of individual members? Each
member’s individual input into the group decision may be small, but will be present
nonetheless. People with an external locus of control feel that sources outside of
themselves control their fate. People with an internal locus of control feel that their own
inner resources and self determination are responsible for shaping their destiny. Summing
things up, the locus of control hypothesis suggests that the individual most susceptible to
persuasion will be the one with the external locus of control. The individual with an internal
locus of control is less awed by authority figures and may react quite critically to any
conspicuous attempts at persuasion.
In what other ways does the group exert an influence? Shared participation means that each
member is an active part of the change process rather than a passive recipient. A public
commitment to a course of action that is witnessed by others will solidify group influence.
For example, at a meeting of the social club, the president says, “Hold up your hand if you
agree with this decision and are willing to help with the project”. That public commitment
certainly reinforces group solidarity.

118118
118118
1 1 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
social norms –
group  defined
standards  for
acceptable  and
unacceptable
behaviour
risky shift
hypothesis –
group members
will be more
daring  than  an
individual  acting
alone
cautious shift
hypothesis –
group  decisions
are more
conservative  than
an  individual
acting  alone
Social support is another important factor because when the group concurs, the
individual has more confidence in the decision. For example, the yearbook club
discussed many possibilities. Finally the group voted on the most popular course of
action and the members started to plan how they would tackle the project. The group-
defined standards concerning what behaviours are acceptable or objectionable are
called social norms. For example, the social norm is that when a group meeting is
called, the group members listen to the leader and follow the rules of order.
The collective behaviour of the group can be quite distinctive from that of each participating
member. The main notion of the risky-shift hypothesis is that the group will be more
brave and daring in its course of action and final decisions than the individual acting alone.
For example, some students are unhappy with the way a social event is being organized in
the school. Ten people who are discontent decide to go to the principal’s office as a group
and complain. A lone complainer might be more reluctant to do that.
A somewhat different perspective is taken in the cautious-shift hypothesis which
maintains that in decisions involving a diversity of values, the group will tend to be more
conservative than individual members. A conservative strategy is pursued by the group in
decisions involving family responsibility or outright danger. For example, a social club made
money through fund-raising and the members believe it should be invested for greater
profits. Some of the members have invested their own money in some high-risk stocks. But
the group members persuade each other that the club funds must be invested in ways that
are more secure. Another example: a group of campers are stranded in the mountains.
Some of the group members propose that they negotiate a risky passage through the
mountains to reach safety, but the group as a whole decides to stay together and send up
flares until they are rescued which is the safer solution.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
119119
119119
119
leadership
situation
hypothesis –
individuals
assume  leadership
because they can
take charge at the
right time
Leadership
The group leader is someone who initiates and organizes action as well as guides activities.
The leader is the individual who has the greatest influence on the members of the group. The
leader must direct the group toward goals that are appropriate and satisfying. The leader
must ensure that group goals do not run counter to goals of people outside the group or
endanger the welfare of society as a whole. The leader has tremendous responsibilities both
to those people within the group and those outside of it.
An effective leader has a double workload. The
leader directs the energies of the group toward
the attainment of certain goals. In addition, the
leader displays an awareness of the social-
emotional needs of the group.
The popular view that some people are born
leaders because they inherit certain qualities that
make them good leaders is not accepted by
experts in the field. People learn to be leaders by
studying and consciously practising good
leadership techniques. Role playing may be part
of a leadership training program. A participant is
asked to assume an imaginary leadership role.
Skills are discussed and analyzed for the
purpose of making improvements. By doing such
an exercise, the leader in training acquires the
technical skills to effectively take charge of a
group. Further, the leader gains important
insights into the attitudes and feelings connected
with this special position.
Why do certain individuals attain the position of leadership in a group? There are many
different possibilities. The leadership situation hypothesis suggests that someone
assumes a position of authority through a combination of factors related to a particular
situation. For example, in an emergency an individual who is not overcome by panic might
step forward to take charge of the situation. These people may be looked upon as heroes of
the crisis. Their term of leadership may be short or long term depending on the nature of the
problem.

120120
120120
1 2 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
leadership
characteristics
hypothesis –
individuals
assume  leadership
because they have
the  qualities  that
make them a good
leader
formal leader –
an  individual  who
is in an
established
position  of
authority  in  the
hierarchy
informal leader –
an  individual  who
has the respect of
the group due to
personal
attributes
The leadership characteristics hypothesis proposes the theory that leadership
positions are earned by those people who have the special charismatic qualities and
organizational skills that appeal to the followers. For example, the captain of the hockey
or football team is usually someone who has the respect of the other team members.
Sometimes a leader is easily identified. The
leader is the president of the organization,
the captain of the team, the principal of the
school, or the mayor of the town. The
person is in a formal position of authority
and he or she takes the responsibility for the
decision-making. However, informal
leaders also exist. These are the people that
have strong organizational and
communication skills. They also have the
respect of the group members. Maybe they
are not in the formal position of authority,
but the group still seeks direction from
them. If an informal leader has very different
ideas from the formal leader, the group is
bound to be splintered by dissent. The best
solution is for the formal and informal
leaders to call a truce and work together for
the overall health and welfare of the group.
For example, Bob has been president of the
community league for 8 years. Because of
other commitments, he resigns as president
but remains on the executive. The
committee members still turn to him for advice in tough matters. He is an informal leader.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
121121
121121
121
democratic  leader
– the head of the
group  who
respects the rights
of the members
and  encourages
them to assume
responsibility
autocratic  leader
– the head of the
group  who
governs with a
dictatorial  style
laissez-faire
leader – the head
of the group who
prefers to avoid
direct  involvement
with the group
Leadership Styles
Every leader has a slightly different style of leadership. Let’s look at three main types.
A democratic leader works with group members through team work. Democratic leaders
will give guidance and direction to the group, but also participate as members of the group.
They usually have a positive effect on the group. Because the opinions of the members are
respected through the democratic process, the results are happy, efficient, and dedicated
workers. Democratic leaders are group-minded. They bring out the best in their group and
they are usually the most highly regarded of all the leaders.
The autocratic leader remains
aloof from the group but directs its
activities with a firm hand.
Autocratic leaders give detailed
instructions to the group but do not
participate to help the group
achieve its goals. Groups under the
supervision of an autocratic leaders
can harbour feelings of hostility and
aggression as well as discontent
that does not appear on the
surface. Group members are
dependent and are obedient to the
leader more out of fear than loyalty.
When autocratic leaders are absent
from the group for a while, the
members may stop working.
The laissez-faire leader is usually
very passive. The philosophy of the
laissez-faire leaders is to let things
go as they will. Laissez-faire
leaders give information if asked,
but they don’t exert much influence
on the group. With a weak leader,
the group may play more than it
works. Group members may work
for their own interests rather than
the goals of the group.

122122
122122
1 2 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
small group – a
cohesive  unit  with
no more than
fifteen  or  twenty
members
Distinguishing a Good Leader
Here are some of the qualities of a good leader.
•   Leaders exhibit strong abilities in the area of intelligence, judgment, social
awareness, assessment and evaluation of skills, and sensitivity to needs.
•   Leaders must have responsibility, self-confidence, determination, and conviction.
•   Leaders must be sociable, actively involved, flexible in their perspective, and
maintain a sense of humour.
•   Leaders must have some degree of status and popularity in the group.
•   Leaders often have a good record of athletic achievement.
•   Leaders are the most vocal and articulate members of the group.
Of course even some of the best leaders do not possess all of these qualities. Often
secondary leaders will emerge within the group to supplement some of the skills found
lacking in the main leader.
Small Group Dynamics – Communication And Unity
A small group is a collective unit of individuals in which face-to-face relationships occur
among members. The actual number of members may vary but the group should be small
enough so that members know each other and can act as a cohesive unit. Perhaps an upper
limit of twenty members is reasonable for a small group. Some examples of small groups are
a hockey team, dance class, yearbook club, evening upgrading class, a volleyball team, or a
Sunday school class.
Why do individuals join certain small groups? People seek groups with goals and interests
similar to their own—they share the same pleasurable activities. The group satisfies the
person’s desire for social interaction and sociability. Another reason for joining the group is
for a sense of security and confidence. The group can give its members a sense of self-
esteem and personal achievement. The group gives the person recognition of his/her
achievement, by providing an audience for the work done. The individual may hope to gain
social status with memberships in some groups. Some people join organizations in order to
further their business contacts or their career opportunities. Small groups provide a strong
network of support for members in a number of ways.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
123123
123123
123
sociometry – the
study of how
group members
relate to each
other
sociogram – a
chart  showing  the
pattern  of
friendships in a
group
AB
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
SOCIOGRAM 1
SOCIOGRAM 1SOCIOGRAM 2SOCIOGRAM 2
What are some of the disadvantages of belonging to small groups? The small group
may not reach decisions very quickly. They may spend too much time in general
discussion. The group might focus too much attention on social activity and not enough
on work activity. Group members might agree to a bad decision suggested by one of
the members rather than risk conflict by disagreeing. Individuals may become too
consumed by the activities of the small group and therefore adopt a narrow perspective.
For example, a student becomes too wrapped up with interests in minor hockey and
never develops any other focuses.
Adults can hold memberships in many groups. Churches and labour unions are two formally
organized groups which are most popular. The more formal education people have the more
likely they are to join a group and be actively involved. People become more involved with
groups as they mature. As people become adults they can participate more effectively in
larger groups.
Can you think of some advantages of holding multiple memberships in many different
groups? Can you think of some of the problems and conflicts that may be encountered
through multiple membership?
Building Unity
One of the major aims of a small group is to build cohesiveness among members. Group
cohesiveness may be defined as the mutual, general attraction that group members feel
toward each other. Cohesiveness is togetherness combined with a willingness to cooperate.
Group cohesiveness is enhanced by common goals and the feeling of members that they
share a common fate. Group cohesiveness is not just a vague feeling of liking other
members. Sociometry is the study of how individuals perceive, think, and feel about other
group members. It is a specific technique for measuring cohesiveness. Direct questions are
asked of group members. For example, one question would be, “Who do you work with
best in your group?” The diagram or chart that is constructed from this information to
illustrate group relationships is called a sociogram.
The connecting lines between group members in Sociogram 1 show stronger relationships
than those in Sociogram 2.

124124
124124
1 2 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
verbal
communication –
exchanging  ideas
through  the
written or spoken
word
nonverbal
communication –
exchanging  ideas
through  body
posture  and
gestures
Besides cohesiveness, another important measure of group strength is the morale of the
group. Morale has three main components: the prevailing attitude of group members,
the loyalty of the members to the group, and the willingness of the members to
participate in the group’s work. Morale usually emphasizes the task orientation of the
group or their willingness to work together on an assignment. The morale of each
individual personally will contribute to either a high or low morale of the group
collectively. For example, the community group had just received the Award of
Outstanding Merit for their program with low income children; morale was very high.
Another example: the sports league had just lost a third of its members due to lack of
interest; morale was very low.
The Communication Factor
Once someone has joined a small group, effective communication will keep the person
involved. Communication opens up the lines of understanding between people. Therefore it
acts as a unifying force. Communication may be defined as the interchange of thoughts,
opinions or information by means of speech, writing or signs. Communication is a message
that is transmitted from one living thing to another. Communication goes beyond receiving
sounds or symbols. A person receiving communication must be able to understand and
distinguish what is being transmitted. Without some form of communication among
members, group behaviour would not be possible. When communication takes place via the
spoken or written word, it is termed verbal communication. When communication occurs
through gestures, signs or body posture, it is termed nonverbal communication. For
example, if you are asked a question and shrug your shoulders, that means “I don’t know”
or “I don’t care”. Putting your head down can show that you are tired.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
125125
125125
125
hierarchy – the
power structure of
the  group
Suppose there is a conflict between verbal and nonverbal communication. Which
message is stronger, or which one tends to be most believable? Usually nonverbal
communication has more power. It comes from our unconscious mind or our true inner
feelings. For example, when the sale clerk says, “I’d love to help you” but he or she has
a frown and stands facing you with arms crossed, you have the feeling that the verbal
message is somewhat insincere.
Information means power. The lines of communication within a group are affected by the
status of the group members. The group leader has a high status and therefore has access to
most information that is communicated. The lower status person may be reluctant to
communicate their ideas to a higher status person, especially if the higher status person will
likely disagree. Some members believe too much communication occurs in a downward
fashion from leaders to followers or from high status to low status persons. When there is a
free flow of information or a more equal exchange of ideas, the organization benefits
because all the top positions are not the only place to find creative ideas.
It has been mentioned before that information means power. In the past, ideas spread very
slowly through an organization. Therefore the power structure of an organization was very
hierarchical which means there was a rigid structure with very defined steps up the ladder
from the general membership to the leaders. For example, the structure would include
employee, supervisor, office manager, assistant director, director and president of the
company. Today, with computers, internet, and the information highway, each person in the
group can set up their own network of information and be very autonomous within a
loose framework of associates.

126126
126126
1 2 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
loneliness – a
feeling  of
yearning for the
company of others
rejection – being
abandoned  or
being  outside  the
group
The  Negative  Side  of  Groups
The group can create unhappiness for the
individual in the form of loneliness which
means that people are outside the border of
the group. People who are alone are not
necessarily lonely. Loneliness must be
defined as lacking group acceptance and
support by someone who misses that
interaction. Here are a few general ideas of
why our society which is busy, sophisticated,
and full of opportunities should produce
lonely people. One reason is that people in
our society are very mobile which cuts them
off from meaningful and lasting relationships
within a group. Another reason is that our
choice of leisure activities tends to promote
solitariness. Nowadays children play
alone more than with each other. Several
years ago, children spent more time
inventing games, negotiating rules, and being part of a team during their play activities.
Currently children are involved in more solitary activities like watching TV, and playing
arcade and computer games. All of those examples tend to not invite group interaction
and may actually damage social skills if they become the focus of a person’s life for an
extended period of time. Therefore loneliness is often self inflicted. People must set
goals to be active within groups and do so.
The individual is not always to blame when group relationships deteriorate. A person can
experience rejection from personal relationships or small groups. Rejection is not entirely
negative; it gives us the opportunity to examine the situation we are in and learn valuable
lessons from it. Rejection may cause people to be more determined to accept a challenge in
order to merit group membership. Rejection teaches people that forming and reforming new
organizations is one of the facts of life. Sometimes people invite rejection from others by
their own lack of esteem and confidence. The message they give to the group is “I would
not be a worthy group member”. Other people have not learned how to put on a pleasant
demeanour and portray a positive attitude. Verbally they complain and make negative
comments. They frown or stare or refuse to make eye contact with others. These people
give the impression that they don’t like other people and they probably don’t like
themselves either. When you are confronted with rejection, use that experience in a positive
way to reform yourself and make creative choices for you outside the confines of the group.
Rejection need not be destructive. If it is analyzed and understood, it can lead to change
and growth within.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
127127
127127
127
xenophobia –
fear of outsiders
Stockholm
Syndrome – the
process  hostages
experience  when
they begin to
identify  with  their
captors
Another very negative emotion is hatred and is usually more intense between large
groups within the society as a whole. It may be related to one of the phobias—
xenophobia which is fear of strangers or outsiders. Fear, aggressiveness, threats about
one’s future and one’s safety bring out feelings of xenophobia. Our basic group, which
can be as small as the family or as extensive as our nation, will behave benevolently
towards outside groups if our survival is not threatened by shortage of food or by
weapons. When the group is threatened, then differences with other groups are not
tolerated or accepted. Then boundaries between groups are strictly enforced.
Throughout the world today there are many examples of ethnic and religious hatred.
Within our country rival gangs readily see others as the enemy. In the United States the
Klu Klux Klan harbours a deep hatred of certain racial groups.
A special kind of group phenomenon that occurs during a lengthy crisis is termed the
Stockholm Syndrome. People who become hostages undergo very intense emotions. If the
hostage siege lasts for some time, the captives may tend to take sides with their captors and
identify with them. The Stockholm Syndrome was first identified when bank employees and
customers were trapped in a bank by a gunman over a long period of time. When the
hostages were finally freed, the police were quite amazed that these people feared for the
safety of the robber and believed the gunman was the oppressed party. During intense
emotions, group dynamics can take a dramatic turn!

128128
128128
1 2 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
bullies –
aggressive,
overpowering,
intimidating
people
Being  Outside  The  Group
Dealing With Bullies
Bullies are aggressive people who derive satisfaction from overpowering and controlling
others either physically or psychologically.  They don’t pick a fair fight; their victims are
weaker than they are.  They are impulsive and dominant.  Bullies are usually boys, but girls
bully as well.  Usually bullies come from homes where parents do not give them enough
attention.  The defenceless victims remind the bullies of their own vulnerability in an abusive
home which makes them strike out at their weaker victims with vengeance.  Bullies tend to
over react to aggression in their peers.  Often they attack peers when there is no
provocation.  The typical victim is often quiet, sensitive and maybe anxious.  Victims may
give the impression that they are insecure and are not worthy; bullies target children they
believe will not retaliate.
If you are singled out by a bully, don’t suffer in silence; then you could become a permanent
victim of this individual.  Find a network of friends or colleagues to give you support since
bullies usually attack lone victims.  If you are a school student, talk to a teacher or a
counsellor about it.  Some schools get the bully and victims together to sort out the problem
with an adult mediator.  Some schools offer sessions for all students where they talk about
strengths and weaknesses to give themselves a better self awareness and appreciation of
others.  Some programs are for bullies only, giving them an opportunity to cope with anger
by role-playing situations involving conflict.
Although bullying is a very negative behaviour, the power of group intervention can certainly
be helpful in eliminating it or keeping it under control.
Unemployment
When people leave school as young adults, receive job training, and secure employment,
their identity becomes closely intertwined with the kind of work they do. When people
introduce themselves to strangers, they give their name and then their occupation. Our jobs
give us many essential things:
•   monetary rewards which we use for survival
•   a group of colleagues who become part of our work team
•   a sense of dignity, purpose, and self-worth because we are able to do something
meaningful to justify our existence
Being unemployed destroys the network of support people need to satisfy all of those
important needs. Being outside the employment group makes people feel helpless and
isolated.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
129129
129129
129
If you lose your job, a group of friends,
associates, and former business contacts can help
you get back on track by providing some
valuable leads in the job market.
Nowadays, more unemployed people are becoming
self-employed by using their entrepreneurial spirit to
set up their own companies or by becoming
consultants to three or four different companies.
These people have taken a new approach to
employment by working independently out of their
homes. How will the new network of independent
workers have an impact on the sense of community?
Will overall community ties be stronger or weaker?
How will it affect other areas of community spirit?
The  Positive  Side  of  Groups
At one time the family unit was one’s basic support group. For many people, this is no
longer true. Family ties are not as strong as they once were. Some families are separated by
long distances due to employment commitments and the general mobility of the population.
Strong personal friendships have replaced the
family unit as a substitute for weakened family
relationships. Close friends provide support
and an outlet for expressing our inner thoughts.
For a friendship to be strong, we must learn to
nurture it and share both time and feelings with
each other.
Friendships between women tend to be
stronger because women are more outwardly
in touch with feelings and tend to emphasis
social bonds to a greater extent. However,
men are starting to be more aware of the value
of friendships with others; even strong
friendships with other men are given attention.
In families, siblings may establish strong ties
with each other. When this occurs the
strongest connections are sister/sister
friendships, then sister/brother connections and
finally brother/brother ties because brothers
tend to be more competitive.

130130
130130
1 3 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
=
AggressiveAggressive
PassivePassive
PeoplePeople
TasksTasks
Our strongest friendships are started when we are in school. Those relationships are
built on the strength of shared, common experiences in the formative years. Close
friends from this period of time can lose contact with each other for several years and
renew the bonds of friendship quickly if their paths cross later in life. However, deep,
constructive friendships can be built at any time in our lives. The value of this kind of
small group contact cannot be underestimated socially, emotionally, and mentally.
Winning With People
People can benefit directly by having some insight into human behaviour and how to deal
with people who have different perspectives on life. That will make our relationships more
productive. In any kind of business or group situation, “people problems” are most
prevalent. You can reduce tension and increase cooperation and harmony by developing an
understanding of how other people feel comfortable and how they approach daily tasks.
Let’s begin with a circle. Suppose all types of people in the world fit into the circle. Then
divide the circle into four equal parts; each sector would contain people with similar
perspectives and personality characteristics. One line will divide people who like to be
active in doing things versus people who like to stand on the sidelines and watch. The
second line will divide people who feel most comfortable relating to other people versus
people who prefer working with tasks.
Each of the sections then forms a quadrant. The people in each quadrant will be a blend of
the two intersecting lines that form their boundaries. Starting with the quadrant on the upper
right are people who emphasize harmony—they are passive and like relating to people
(counsellors, therapists). In the lower right, we have people who are thinkers and analysts—
they are passive and enjoy tasks (scientists, computer programmers). In the lower left are
people who like managing for the sake of being productive and efficient—they operate
aggressively and prefer tasks to people (supervisors, production managers). In the upper
left are people who are socializers and the “life of the party”—they are outgoing and like
relating to people (sales people, television hosts).

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
131131
131131
131
People-Oriented
(feelings)
Winning With People
Passive
(watching)
Task-Oriented
(thinking)
Aggressive
(doing)
SOCIALIZER
HARMONIZER
MANAGER
THINKER
4
1
32
Here is what the description looks like in diagram format.
A more detailed description of each type of person follows. Where are you in the diagram?
What about your family members, friends, colleagues, and the people in some of your small
groups? People tend to feel most comfortable with people from the same group who have
the same perspective on life. People will also feel relatively comfortable with people in the
adjoining quadrants. However, if you think about where you fit and where some of your
strongest adversaries fit, you will realize that most often you are at odds with the people
from the opposite side of the quadrant. For example, people in #2 and #4 will tend to have
the most conflicts. People from #1 and #3 are also opposites. Is it most productive to have
a mixture of people in a small group or to have like-minded individuals working together?
You might think about these questions as we take a more in-depth look at the
characteristics of each group.

132132
132132
1 3 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The People Puzzle
4–Aggressive. People-Oriented
Values Lively Social Contacts with Others
•   enjoys interacting with people
•   is a risk-taker
•   enjoys crisis and challenge
•   leads by energizing people
•   is fast-moving, fast-talking
•   is at ease with people but also likes
action
•   is outgoing, sociable, enthusiastic,
adaptable and spontaneous
In addition is: lively, gregarious, impulsive,
spirited, persuasive
3–Aggressive. Task-Oriented
Values Productivity, Efficiency
•   is a no-nonsense problem solver
•   is skills oriented
•   values strategic thinking
•   likes technical, hands-on tasks
•   makes unilateral (dictatorial) decisions
•   is assertive, competitive, and
intimidating
•   enjoys creating plans, timelines,
quotas and flow charts
•   values competence and quick-paced
progress
In addition is: determined, forceful, firm,
industrious, organized
1–Passive. People-Oriented
Values Harmony With Others
•   likes one-to-one contact
•   encourages self awareness
•   seeks personal insights
•   is aware of factors affecting human
development
•   is easy-going, caring, cooperative,
supportive
•   is sensitive to feelings and personal
growth
In addition is: private, charitable, lenient,
modest, empathetic
2–Passive. Task-Oriented
Values Facts, Figures, Thinking Skills
•   enjoys thinking through ideas
•   is analytical
•   enjoys details and sequential
thought
•   likes transmitting knowledge
•   is well organized
•   values accuracy, rationality, logic
•   emphasizes precision and being right
In addition is: methodical, disciplined,
factual, efficient, contemplative

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
133133
133133
133
The People Puzzle offers some interesting insights into the way people perceive life and
their most comfortable style of
approach for work, social, leisure, and
family situations. The boundary lines
are not absolute which means you are
not exclusively one type of person. But
if you think about it carefully, one of
the four quadrants will be your most
comfortable style for a majority of the
time. When you feel a distinct
uneasiness about someone you know,
check to see if they are in the opposite
quadrant. Look at the qualities of your
opposite. Try to be objective and
unbiased. What are their strengths?
What qualities do you admire? Which
of their qualities would be especially
helpful to you if the two of you had to
work together as a team?
Summary
This lesson provided some interesting perspectives on the roles we perform throughout
our lives. It also presented a great deal of material on the nature of the group. Groups
have many special characteristics that influence the attitudes and behaviours of people
who work together collectively.
To summarize:
•   Roles define the way people act or behave.
•   People step into or step out of roles at various times.
•   Roles are packages of benefits and obligations.
•   Roles are interdependent behaviours that fit into a network or system.
•   A social relationship is a set of reciprocal roles.
•   Roles are based on sex (gender identity), age, kinship, and residence.
•   Roles are arbitrarily or randomly assigned to each sex.
•   Male roles have a higher status than female roles.
•   The focus on the extended kinship has been replaced by the nuclear
family.
•   Roles are ascribed (automatic at birth) or achieved (earned on merit and
hard work).

134134
134134
1 3 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
•   New roles are learned through the socialization process which means the
child observes and imitates others, usually family members.
•   Gender identity is an important task.
•   Maleness and femaleness are determined by biological factors.
•   Masculinity and femininity are behaviours which arise from our cultural
perspective of the sexes.
•   Role conflicts may arise because roles are misunderstood or because roles
change which causes disruptions.
•   Androgyny is the flexibility of combining male and female traits.
•   Changes in roles may be uncomfortable, but often changes are necessary
if people want to improve.
•   Rites of passage is an initiation test that people must pass before they are
given full status in a role. It is used in some circumstances but not in
others.
•   Birth order proposes some interesting theories about the personalities of
first borns, middle children, and last born children.
•   Group behaviour is quite different from the behaviour of individuals.
•   Human beings have strong social needs which are satisfied through
interaction with the group.
•   The family helps in the socialization process which refers to teaching
lessons about how to live in our culture.
•   Peers are people who have equal status; reference groups give us our
beliefs and values.
•   The crowd is a transitory group of people who have a sense of
togetherness for a particular objective.
•   The clique is organized around class lines and is more cohesive and close-
knit.
•   People identify with an in group; those outside the group are the out
group.
•   The goal of inclusive groups is to expand activities and membership.
•   The objective of exclusive groups is to limit membership to a special inner
circle.
•   Task-oriented groups perform a specific job.
•   Interaction-oriented groups highlight social contacts with others.
•   A person’s locus of control (external or internal) will determine if the
person believes in group control or self determination.
•   The risky shift hypothesis states that the group will be more brave in
decision-making with the support of the whole group.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
135135
135135
135
A
•   The cautious shift hypothesis states that group decisions will be more
conservative in nature.
•   Many factors affect leadership. Sometimes people assume leadership
because they can handle tough situations; others are leaders because they are
organized and have the qualities that appeal to people.
•   A democratic leader has the respect and commitment of the members.
•   An autocratic leader is dictatorial.
•   A laissez-faire leader lets the group do what they like.
•   A sociogram studies the small group by examining which people interact best
with each other.
•   Communication is an important aid to group solidarity.
•   People outside a group may experience loneliness and rejection.
•   Fear of people outside one’s group may lead to hatred and xenophobia.
•   Close friendships that last a lifetime are the strongest form of group belonging.
•   The Winning With People model divides people into four quadrants with
special characteristics.
Turn to Assignment Booklet 4 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

136136
136136
1 3 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Lesson 2: Emotions and Criminal Behaviour
Overview
Emotions make the living, breathing organism we call “human beings” the loving,
compassionate, fiery creatures that we are. Emotions energize our behaviour and our
relationships with others. Emotions can also take a negative turn which can make
people angry, jealous, violent and generally put them under a tremendous amount of
stress. In this lesson we will discuss the sweeping range of emotions, how we can
control their dark side, and how we can make the most of their positive qualities.
People live, work, play, and help each other in groups. They not only want to further
their own goals but want to help their fellow human beings as well. Fortunately this is
true a majority of the time. Cooperation means progress for one and all. Occasionally
serious problems cloud our relationships with others. Sometimes people set out to
intentionally harm others or to damage and destroy their property.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
137137
137137
137
What causes criminal behaviour to occur? Does it just happen to the “lower elements” of
our society? Why might one member of a family be criminally deviant and the rest be law-
abiding citizens? Is the crime rate increasing? Are criminals becoming more vicious in their
crimes? Can criminal intent be predicted? These are just a few of the questions we will
tackle during our research of criminal behaviour.
Lesson 2 will focus on these topics:
•   Aggression: Studying It From Many Angles
•   How Do We Acquire Aggressive Behaviour?
•   Child Abuse As a Form of Aggression
•   Dealing With Difficult People
•   Frustration and Stress
•   Emotions and Illness
•   How Children Deal With Death
•   Suicide
•   Defense Mechanisms
•   Nurturing Our Positive Emotions
•   Pets and Emotions
•   Touch Can Calm Emotions
•   Criminal Statistics
•   The Psychology of Victimization
•   Violence in the Home
•   Effect of Violence in the Media
•   Youth Crime and the Young Offenders’ Act
•   Kleptomania and Pyromania
•   The Psychopath
•   Sexual Assault
•   Cults
•   Criminal Profiles
Aggression:  Studying It From Many Angles
Aggression is often misunderstood, feared and generally viewed as distasteful. What is
aggression? One definition of aggression states that aggression is any action that directly or
indirectly inflicts harm on others. The word aggression is used to describe behaviour that
ranges from asserting one’s personal interests to violent, physical action. Two things most
often associated with aggression are anger and a surge of power. Aggressive people
communicate in a loud, commanding manner. They may put people down or use sarcasm in
their speech.

138138
138138
1 3 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Passive behaviour is the opposite of aggressive behaviour. It involves avoiding
confrontations and being led or controlled by someone else. Although it is common belief
that passive behaviour is very civilized, such behaviour can prove to be unhealthy. Failure
to respond to any conflict or difficult situation can result in unsatisfactory lifestyle choices.
For example, failure to state preferences as to how you would like to spend leisure time
may mean that you always do what your friends want to do. In this case you may be
disappointed at your friends’ choices, and yet never give yourself a chance to develop your
own preferences. Passiveness may also be called submissiveness. Passive people often
withdraw altogether from social interaction or remain meekly in the background.
How does assertiveness compare to aggressiveness? Assertiveness refers to behaviour such
as standing up for one’s rights and interests and actively coping with disagreeable situations.
Assertive people approach situations with a win-win goal in mind. They stick up for their
rights by speaking up in a bold and insistent manner, but at the same time they show respect
toward others. Assertive people have many positive skills which include:
•   personal independence: high levels of self-confidence
•   leadership skills: a sense of personal power when approaching situations
•   strong social skills:  listening to others, initiating and handling conversations with ease
and finesse
Anger is an intense emotion, but it is not always destructive. It can lead to greater awareness
and understanding if the individuals concerned can de-escalate the conflict and talk over a
possible solution. Assertive people feel anger, but deal with it by trying to find constructive
ways to resolve the problem.
Here are some situations in which assertiveness is appropriate:
•   when restaurant services or purchases are not satisfactory
•   when someone disturbs you by talking loudly at a movie, play, or concert
•   telling someone good news about yourself (not in a boastful way)
•   resisting sales pressure
•   refusing an unreasonable request
•   meeting the challenge of conversing with someone who does not share your point of
view
•   requesting a return of borrowed items
Aggression
Violence
Passive
Behaviour
Assertiveness
-
0
+

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
139139
139139
139
Are aggression and violence related?
Violent behaviour can be defined as
unjust or unwarranted exertion of force
or power; injurious actions leading to
physical damage or harm. Violence is
the most extreme form of aggression in
which threats, force, and hostile action
are characteristic. In the interests of
survival, some forms of aggression are
acceptable, but violence is considered
destructive and harmful. For example, if
a hockey player body checks another
player in a clean, sportsman like way,
he is being aggressive, if a hockey
player uses his stick to deliberately
injure another player he is acting in a
violent manner.
When people continually suppress their hostility and don’t come to terms with it, violent
kinds of aggression may erupt. Police records confirm the fact that some of the most vicious
crimes have been committed by individuals who are perceived to be very gentle, quiet and
conservative. Much hostility can be traced back to poor communication skills.
More will be said about violence and crime later in this lesson.
How  Do  We  Acquire  Aggressive  Behaviour?
Aggression is inborn or human beings are born with aggressive tendencies.
The theory that aggression is instinctive states that aggression is a necessary instinct for the
survival of the individual and the species as a whole. This was especially true for our early
ancestors because their world was full of daily, life-threatening turmoil. The human body
was equipped to survive such dangers. For example, the male hormone testosterone or
androgen appears to increase the reaction to respond aggressively.
According to the inborn theory of aggression, although our lives are more secure nowadays,
we are still born with the instinct for aggression. Robust youngsters are assertive in gaining
attention in order to fulfill their needs. Normal, everyday activities like play, curiosity, and
exploration of the world involve some element of aggression from the average infant. A baby
who is too passive may be ill in some way.

140140
140140
1 4 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Aggression is learned.
The other perspective on aggression is that the individual is not aggressive until external
factors set up a frustrating situation which leads to aggression. According to this theory,
aggression occurs when people experience conflict and frustration rather than through
inherited characteristics.
Since children are emotionally close to their parents, aggressive behaviour from parents
sets a negative example for the children. Aggression appears to be intensified by power-
oriented child rearing techniques such as frequent and overly strict physical punishments and
threats. The proper handling of rewards and punishments by parents is important so the
dark side of aggression does not become established.
Anonymity is the act of hiding one’s identity and becoming nameless. When people
are allowed to be anonymous, aggression has a tendency to increase. Personal
anonymity removes the fear of other people’s disapproval and censure. Accountability
no longer holds the conscience in check so people feel more free to behave
aggressively. For example, the Klu Klux Klan practise their aggressive deeds in
disguise. Another example: many people seem to be less inhibited at a costume party
where their identity is hidden.
Overcrowding is another factor that can create feelings of anonymity and contribute to
aggressive behaviour. In crowded cities, people construct emotional barriers to protect
themselves from the psychic overload of frequent contact with many strangers. These
barriers create a private space in a fast paced and impersonal environment. A sense of
community and personal responsibility for the rights of others often does not exist in
metropolitan areas. Psychic overload can cause people to withdraw from others and
become immune to their feelings.
Whether aggression can be accepted as an innate inborn drive or whether aggression is
merely a response to frustration arising from adverse external conditions has still not
been resolved.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
141141
141141
141
Child Abuse As a Form of Aggression
Child abuse is a highly condemned form of aggression which is often successfully
hidden from public criticism by the offenders. Some of the injuries inflicted on helpless
youngsters by parents and family members are unbelievable and horrifying.
Sometimes parents have extremely high expectations for their children at
inappropriately early ages. They use harsh measures to enforce demands on their
children which can lead to child abuse. Abusing parents were often abused children
themselves. Because these individuals grew up seeing abusive techniques used as a form of
discipline, they may believe it is a natural way to raise their children. Another reason
parents abuse their kids is a lack of parenting skills. They really don’t know how to raise a
child. Parenting involves tremendous responsibility and some stress. When frustrations build
up in the home, the parents may lash out with uncontrolled anger.
In 75% of the cases of child abuse, parents are responsible. Babysitters, step parents
and other relatives may be found at fault to a lesser degree. Sometimes for their own
safety and best interests, the child must be removed from the home. Usually this action
is taken only if the child is in serious physical danger. While separating the child from
the abusive family member is important, the child may be unhappy with such a
solution. From the child’s point of view, he or she is being punished in a sense by being
removed from the familiarity of the home environment. Another solution to correct
abusive parenting is counselling for the whole family. Parents learn anger management
and how to teach their children responsibility and problem solving in a nonviolent way.
Besides mental and physical abuse, children can be sexually abused by people they
love and trust. Adults are in a position of power and authority which makes it relatively
easy to sexually abuse a child. The pain of betrayal can scar the child for life and may
interfere with the development of intimate relationships as adults. Sexually abused
children have intense feelings of shame and guilt even though they are innocent
victims. They feel isolated and develop feelings of low self-esteem. Some abused
children are too confused or afraid to report what is happening to them and thus some
of them endure many years of mistreatment. As adults, they may become abusers
themselves. Physically they may develop chronic pain of one kind or another. Some
may have eating disorders. Emotionally, they may turn to alcohol, promiscuity, and
even prostitution in some cases. Feelings of depression or suicidal thoughts are other
symptoms.
Adults who have a reasonable suspicion that a child is
being physically or sexually abused have an obligation
to report it to the authorities. In Alberta, the Child
Abuse Hotline has been established to handle
emergency calls on a 24 hour basis. The number is 1-
800-668-6868.

142142
142142
1 4 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Dealing  With  Difficult  People
There are many difficult people in the world and from time to time everyone will come face-
to-face with them. Difficult people may complain constantly or may try to be manipulative to
get their way. A difficult person is simply someone who causes problems for others. But
although the definition is simple, the solutions take effort before the situation is resolved.
Here are some constructive questions to ask when faced with conflicts:
•   How do you define the problem?
•   How does the other person define the problem?
•   How does your behaviour contribute to the problem?
•   How does the other person’s behaviour contribute to the problem?
•   What events tend to set the conflict in motion?
•   What are areas of agreement between the two of you?
•   What are some of your strengths that could be used to resolve the conflict?
•   What are some goals you have in common with the other person?
•   How will you celebrate your success when the conflict is resolved?
To work through these questions, you must be honest and
objective as possible. That is usually difficult because we
usually see ourselves as blameless and the other person as the
villain. If you believe resolving the conflict is important, you
must go beyond that line of reasoning.
Dealing with difficult people will generate feelings of anger and
aggression. Here are some effective ways of dealing with
these emotionally powerful forces.
Admit Anger — In general most people tend to block the true picture of anger, with the
result that it is driven underground where it becomes a source of future hostility. They
believe that anger is a sign of immaturity and they feel guilty.
Pinpoint the Source of Anger — In this step you become more focused on the specific
problem. The most effective way to handle annoying situations is to begin by controlling
your own behaviour. In a situation with a lot of anger and conflict, if we lose control of our
emotions or internalize the hurt feelings and withdraw, we cannot reach a healthy solution.
Ask yourself a lot of thoughtful questions to uncover the real source of anger.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
143143
143143
143
Approach Anger Head-On — Good communication skills are essential to resolving
conflicts that result from anger. Try to own your anger rather than resorting to blame.
Instead of saying, “you made me angry” (which means someone else can control your
feelings), say, “I feel angry when you...” or “I chose to feel angry because...”. We let other
people control us by giving us negative feelings. Absence of blame will help you and others
resolve the conflict. We must not become engulfed in emotions because that weakens our
ability to do some clear-headed thinking.
Carefully Examine Your Reaction to Anger — Did the anger arise from fear, insecurity,
rejection, resentment, or a feeling of injustice? The key step when dealing with difficult
people is to organize your thoughts and concentrate on solving the problem instead of
rebutting negative comments which simply escalates the anger. You might paraphrase the
problem they have put before you. That shows you are listening to them and trying to gain
an understanding of their concerns. You may also take notes and ask questions for
clarification. By using those methods, you direct your energies to solving the problem
instead of exchanging insults.
Frustration
Frustration may be defined as the thwarting or
blocking of behaviour that will help us to reach our
goals. As the definition suggests people want to
follow a certain course of action but their efforts are
defeated. What are some frustrating situations we
may encounter? For example, you cannot find an
important book that is overdue at the library and
spend all Saturday afternoon searching for it. Another
example: you may have wanted to enter a particular
occupation but found you didn’t have the aptitude or
financial resources to pursue that career. Some
frustrating situations are momentary and insignificant.
Others may be long term and much more devastating.
Frustration tolerance is the ability of an individual to
handle frustration without becoming maladjusted or too upset. People exhibit a variety of
behaviours when they meet frustrating events. They may withdraw if they feel they cannot
cope with the conditions. They may become angry. Well adjusted people accept some
measure of frustration as a normal event that occurs in the real world from time to time.
Rather than feeling helpless, the emotionally secure individuals readjust their goals and plan
around the blockades that arise.

144144
144144
1 4 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Conflict can occur when an individual must choose between alternatives. Sometimes the
consequences are not important to us. When the decision is easy, we simply pick an
alternative at random and therefore conflict is very minor. But at other times the decision is
weighty and the alternatives become quite significant to us.
Approach—approach, Avoidance—avoidance, Approach—avoidance
There are three kinds of conflicting situations: approach—approach, avoidance—
avoidance, and approach—avoidance
Approach—approach is a positive win/win situation. When you are offered two
attractive choices, you are enticed by both possibilities. Both alternatives are equally
desirable in the approach—approach conflict. You may ask, “Why would it be
considered a conflict if everything is positive?” We consider each choice in turn and
may waver from one to the other until we finally decide. Sometimes we put our
decision on hold until we have a chance to think about it. Gradually one alternative will
gain a slight edge over the other and we decide in its favour. Later we may reverse our
decision. Approach—approach conflicts sound easy to solve, but we are often fearful
that we may miss some important factors and take second best. For example, your
friend asks you to go to an exciting party where you know you’ll have a great time.
The same night is a concert 100 km away; the entertainers will be superb. Which one
do you choose?
The approach gradient is the term used to describe the increase in the strength of the
pull toward an attractive goal, the closer the individual gets to the goal. Once you have
decided on a goal, all of your attention and energy is directed toward reaching that goal.
Avoidance—avoidance is not a good situation to be facing. You are offered two
unattractive choices and are asked to choose one. Your strategy here will be to assess
both possibilities carefully and take the lesser of two evils. For example, you have a
special project for science class which is difficult, complicated and time-consuming.
You wish to avoid it. The other alternative is that the teacher will call out your name in
class if the assignment is not done which is embarrassing. In addition, you risk the
chance of getting a low grade or failing the course. Therefore you are experiencing an
avoidance—avoidance conflict.
The avoidance gradient is the term used to describe the increase in the strength of the
tendency of an individual to avoid an undesirable goal the closer one gets to the goal.
For example, if you have a great fear of reptiles, when you visit the zoo and approach
the reptile enclosure, the closer you get, the harder you will find it to control the urge to
make a fast exit.
approach-
approach – a
situation  that  has
two  alternative
choices which are
both  positive
approach
gradient – the
closer one is to an
attractive  goal,
the stronger is the
pull  toward  the
goal
avoidance-
avoidance – a
situation  that  has
two  alternative
choices which are
both  negative
avoidance
gradient – the
closer one is to a
negative  or
frightening
situation,  the
stronger is the
pull to get away
from the situation

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
145145
145145
145
The third type of conflicting situation is approach—avoidance. That type of situation has
both positive and negative values. Few choices in our lives are either all good or all bad.
Many of our choices will have a mixture of both. We are pulled in opposite directions as we
focus on the good points and then the bad points. For example, you have just baked a tasty
casserole. When you pull it out of the oven you are tempted to taste it (approach). But you
also remember what it feels like to burn your mouth on hot food, so you set it aside to cool
(avoidance). Approach— avoidance conflicts are usually much more complex than that,
especially when they occur in the area of our personal relationships.
The  Power  of  Stress
Like frustration and conflict, stress is an inevitable part of our lives. What is stress?
Stress is effort, strain, intense exertion, and pressure from adverse conditions that make
demands of an individual. Stressor stimuli is the term which describes the factors
creating stress. Stress reaction is the defense used to respond to or conquer stress. For
example, getting a severe cold would be a stressor stimuli. The stress reaction would be
taking suitable medication, drinking soups and juices, and getting extra rest.
Stressor stimuli can be any one of a number of things: illness, emotional upheaval,
physical restraint, or physical dangers. The body’s adrenal system becomes ready to
cope with the stressful situation after being stimulated by the hormone ACTH.
Faulty reactions to stress can be very damaging. If the body perceives a threat and acts
accordingly, stress is the same whether the threat was real or imagined. People are
encouraged to find their own best stress level whether it is low (with lots of relaxation)
or high (because the individual thrives on pressure and challenges).
approach-
avoidance – a
situation  that  has
a  combination  of
positive  and
negative
alternatives
stress – a
condition  of
strain, pressure,
tension  or
hardship
stressor stimuli –
the  factors  which
create stress
stress reaction –
the response
given to control
or improve a
stressful  situation

146146
146146
1 4 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
One of the outstanding authorities on stress is a Canadian, Dr. Hans Selye, from the
University of Montreal. Dr. Selye believes that stress is a natural and essential state for
everyone. We even experience some stress when we sleep. No stress means death!
Dr. Selye classifies two body reactions when stress occurs. Syntoxic means to live with
or to adjust to something. For example, you live in an apartment with noisy neighbours
in the suite directly above you. You turn up your TV and CD player a little louder to
drown out some of the noise. Catatoxic means to attack. For example, you live in an
apartment with noisy neighbours in the suite directly above you. You knock on their
door to ask them to be more quiet or you complain to the landlord.
Stress comes in two basic types, healthy and unhealthy. Yes, stress can be healthy!
Normal stress is beneficial from the point of view that it makes people alert, responsive
and often more efficient. Some of our emotions centering around stress and tension can
be very exciting. Certain sports activities contribute to healthy stress. Stress becomes
dangerous to our health when our bodies get geared up for stress, the stressful situation
passes, but we cannot turn off the stress button. Stress becomes continuous. The body’s
defenses may deteriorate when stress becomes permanent.
Two reactions to stress are fear and anxiety. Anxiety is a general feeling of uneasiness
arising from the expectation of a threatening situation from an unknown source. For
example, Martha was starting a new job. Everything seemed fine, but she still felt very
nervous and uneasy although she couldn’t pinpoint why. Fear usually originates with a
specific threat such as financial difficulties, possibility of losing one’s job, or actual
physical danger.
syntoxic – a
response  which
focuses  on
acceptance  or
accommodation
catatoxic –  a
response  which
takes an
aggressive
approach  to
handling  stress
anxiety – a
general state of
fear, dread, or
uneasiness

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
147147
147147
147
Stress List
Stress appears in many forms. As Dr. Selye has pointed out, no stress means death. A wise
approach to stress is to make sure that pressures do not bombard us from all directions at
once. That is similar to having ten large airplanes attempting to land at the airport all at the
same time.
Here are some of the situations we face at one time or another that can be stressful.
Personal changes in our lives generate some intense feelings.
•   Death of a spouse
•   Divorce
•   Death of a close family member
•   Personal injury or illness
•   Getting married
•   Laid off work
•   Buying a home
•   Gaining a new family member
•   Death of a close friend
•   Change to a new line of work
•   Outstanding personal achievement
•   Change in residence
•   Trouble with the boss
•   Christmas or a major family celebration
•   Serious disagreement between family members or friends
•   Car accident
•   Surgery
•   Being a victim of crime
•   Budgeting problems

148148
148148
1 4 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Emotions  and  Illness
Stress can hamper the healthy functioning of the gastrointestinal tract and the autonomic
nervous system. Loss of appetite, migraine headaches, allergies, ulcers, high blood pressure,
muscle tensions, and heart disease are a few of the many body responses to stress. Stress
may precipitate psychosomatic illness. These illnesses arise from the mind or emotions but
the body symptoms that occur are quite real. We will learn more aboutpsychosomatic
illness in a later lesson.
There may be some truth to the vulnerability
hypothesis. As an organism becomes more
biologically vulnerable, stress gains the upper hand.
Studies have been done noting connections
between stress and the overall health of the
individual with ordinary infectious diseases such as
cold, strep throat, and the flu. How much stress
the person has in their lives and whether or not
individuals have a mild or severe case of these
illnesses seems to correlate.
Scientists are accumulating evidence that strongly
suggests a biochemical link between one’s
emotional state, the immune function, and the
progression of one of our most serious illnesses—
cancer. Scientists know that the central nervous
system has hook-ups to the endocrine or hormonal
system and the immune system. They also know
there are biological pathways linking the central
nervous system to the tumours.
It has been recognized that the health of a patient’s spirit is as important as the health of the
patient’s body. When people learn the news that they have cancer, it comes as a devastating
blow. Doctors say it commonly takes several days before the emotional turmoil begins to
subside and the person can think rationally about treatment and discuss it realistically. Self-
help groups are very important in helping patients cope with the reality of the disease.
psychosomatic
illness – an illness
or  unhealthy
condition  brought
about  by
emotional
pressures

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
149149
149149
149
How Children Deal With Death
It is best to deal with issues of death before the child actually experiences it first-hand.
Three or four years of age could be a good time to start. If young children are prepared for
small deaths like a dead bird or animal, then they will be prepared for the more significant
deaths they will face later on in life such as the death of grandparents, extended relatives,
family members, or pets. The emotional pain a young child experiences connected with
death involves shock, anger, worry, perhaps guilt, and sometimes feelings of abandonment.
Children may not necessarily show grief through crying. Behaviour such as aggression,
withdrawal, moodiness, eating disruptions, and sleeping disorders are common signals that
the child is grieving. Young children are usually not capable of verbally expressing their grief.
Children may be comfortable expressing grief through artwork, music, or play activities such
as role playing a funeral. Older children will find some therapy by being involved in
commemorative activities of some kind.
These tips may be useful for adults when helping children deal with death.
•   Be straightforward and don’t use euphemisms like “they have gone to sleep”. Phrases
like that connected to death experiences may cause the child to have nightmares about
falling asleep. Death can be explained by saying that when people are dead their
bodies don’t work anymore. When people die they are gone from our lives and do
not return.
•   Talk openly about the situation. Emphasize that death is a normal part of our lives.
Paraphrase some of their statements about their grief to show you understand.
•   Mention that the dead go to a place that is safe and good. But stress that they should
not take steps to join the dead.
•   Get the child to think about
the happy times they had
with the deceased. Talk
about the person or pet
who died. Listen to their
expressions of grief.
Reassure them that it is OK
to feel as they do.
•   Talk to the child about what
can be done to help him/her
through the process of
mourning. Eventually they
will establish new directions
and invest in new
relationships.

150150
150150
1 5 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Suicide
Canada has the third highest teen suicide rate in the world. Within Canada, Nunavut has the
highest rate of teenage suicide. In 1997, Alberta’s suicide rate of 14.3 deaths per 100,000
people was the second highest in Canada. When you examine total suicide deaths, most
involve teenage or young adult males.
Women attempt suicide nine times more frequently than men. However, men use guns more
often as a means of committing suicide, so their completion rate is higher. When women
attempt to commit suicide, they tend to use drug overdoses, so if they are rushed to the
hospital in time, there is more of a chance they can be saved. Women have more of a
tendency to reach out to others and give warning signals that they might be contemplating
suicide. Most people who attempt suicide have given some type of warning sign, but that
can be missed if you don’t know what to look for.
Suicide can be traced to a wide range of factors such as poverty, isolation, divorce,
family alcoholism, prejudice, intense negative pressure from peers, and academic
pressures. All of these situations can plunge people into serious depression.
Unemployment can trigger suicide because it can destroy an individual’s self-esteem.
People who harbour thoughts of suicide need professional counselling. But here are
some general tips to keep in mind if you are close to someone who feels emotionally
distraught:
•   Watch people who seem to be chronically unhappy. Try to introduce them to
situations that will boost their self-esteem. Listen calmly and show you care.
•   Building up self-confidence is more helpful than simply sending people messages
about the horrors of suicide.
•   Being able to share feelings with a spouse or close friend may reduce the risk of
suicide.
•   Get professional help when people repeatedly talk of suicide. Don’t agree to keep
their secret about committing suicide.
We must remember that suicide is an individual choice. Never blame anyone when it
happens. There is a great tendency for family and friends to feel guilty when suicide
occurs. Be honest with your feelings so you don’t set up any barricades which will
prevent you from working through your feelings of bereavement.
Feelings that survivors display when suicide deaths occur are different than for other
causes of death. First, people feel numb as a means of self protection from the death.
Second, their emotions come forward in various ways as they acknowledge their grief.
Finally, they begin to feel more comfortable with their feelings and begin to take small
steps to get on with their lives.
Everyone expresses grief in their own personal way. Bereavement takes time.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
151151
151151
151
Defense  Mechanisms
Sigmund Freud was the first psychologist to categorize and describe defense
mechanisms. A defense mechanism may be defined as a behaviour that an individual
uses in response to frustration or conflict. They are protective measures which shelter
the individual’s self-esteem when threatened. Defense mechanisms keep people from
getting overly anxious. They go into action automatically before a person becomes
aware of building anxiety and keep the person from becoming too upset.
Defense mechanisms are unconscious
responses. We are usually not aware of using
them and do not deliberately choose to use
them for our protection.
How do defense mechanisms work? They
alleviate anxiety by using methods that deny,
falsify or distort reality. They are indirect and
sometimes self defeating ways of coping with
problems even though the individual employs
them with good intentions in mind. Defense
mechanisms may be either desirable or
undesirable depending on how and to what
degree they are used. We will now examine
some of the more popular types of defense
mechanisms.
Defense mechanisms can be grouped in these categories:
•   repression, suppression, reaction formation
•   compensation, overcompensation, sublimation
•   projection, introjection, identification
•   procrastination
•   displaced aggression
•   rationalization
•   regression
defense
mechanisms – a
behaviour
response to
conflict  or
frustration  which
gives the
individual  some
protection

152152
152152
1 5 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
153153
153153
153
Repression
Repression is a way of dealing with impulses that threaten a person’s security. An
individual tries to do away with a wish or desire by refusing to acknowledge its
presence. Repression refers to the act of pushing out of awareness any thought,
feeling, or impulse that causes anxiety. After the threat is removed, safeguards or
barriers are set up to bar the return of these thoughts.
Repression is a form of motivated
forgetting which pushes problems aside.
For example, many people are anxious
about being angry for fear of what the
consequences may be. They repress their
anger by refusing to show such feelings.
The repressed feelings are there but the
individual is not aware of them. However,
to compensate the individual may have
very angry dreams or anger may slip out
as sarcastic remarks, or the body may
develop a physical illness like high blood
pressure.
Denial like repression is a refusal to admit
reality. It is less drastic than repression,
and is usually just used as a temporary
means to avoid the unpleasant. For
example, often denial is used to defend
against unpleasant events like the death of
a loved one especially when one first hears
the news. The survivor cannot admit that
the loved one is really gone. The person who denies a painful experience can still recall
it; it is not totally erased from memory as in the case of repression.
A severe form of repression is amnesia. When amnesia occurs the person represses or
forgets personal memories, but they do not need to be relearned when memory is
restored. The person’s general knowledge remains intact because it is not threatening
and therefore this information is not repressed. For example, a person with amnesia can
still remember general knowledge like how to count to ten, speak a foreign language, or
play a musical instrument. But the amnesia causes them to forget personal knowledge
like their name, their family members, and their place of residence. You will learn more
about amnesia in a later lesson.
repression –
“forgetting”
unpleasant
situations  by
pushing  them  out
of our awareness
denial – refusing
to admit or
acknowledge  a
painful
experience
amnesia – loss of
memory due to
physical  or
psychological
factors

154154
154154
1 5 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Suppression
Suppression is closely related to repression yet it is distinctive in its own way.
Suppression is a deliberate, conscious act to cover up a wish or a desire. Unlike
repression, suppression occurs with some awareness by the person. A person using
suppression is somewhat aware that he/she is using this defense mechanism.
Let’s look at some examples.
Repression:A child has the urge to hit his father. However, this is unpleasant to the
child so he wishes that impulse out of existence. He says and believes
that he never had such an impulse.
Suppression:A child has the urge to hit his father but acts as if he had no such
feeling. The child is aware of the feeling but takes measures to keep it
hidden.
Reaction Formation
Remember the definition of repression you learned earlier? Sometimes repression isn’t
enough of a defense. When this is the case a person adds additional defenses, behaving
exactly the opposite to the way he/she really wants to behave. Such a defense is called
reaction formation. Reaction formation can be distinguished for its flagrance,
exaggeration, and compulsiveness. For example, although John is actually a very shy
and dependent individual, he becomes a loud and demanding executive in charge of a
large and successful company. Another example: a mother who resents the many
demands of her children may become overprotective of them; she is acting in an
opposite way to her true feelings. Further example: Tommy is a shy fifteen year old. He
really likes Maria, but ignores her or acts gruff in her presence to hide his real feelings.
Compensation
Compensation refers to an attempt to make up for a deficiency in one area by putting
forth extra effort in another area in order to be competent in that field. Compensation can be
a positive way of meeting frustrations and may lead to good mental health. The bonus may
be that the person might be better off than when the frustration began. A problem may
remain if you gain a sense of competence in a new area, but
have not necessarily resolved your anxiety about your
lack of skill in the original problem area.
Compensation means that people direct their
energy to the pursuit of a substitute goal. For
example, Tommy is a failure in sports activities
and therefore he is concerned about his lack of
athletic skills. He devotes his attention to studying
about and repairing cars. He is using
compensation.
suppression –
remaining
somewhat  aware
of covering up
unpleasant
information
reaction
formation –
taking  on
characteristics  or
assuming
behaviours  that
are  completely
opposite to one’s
true  nature
compensation –
making up for
shortcomings  in
one area by
focusing  on
another  area

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
155155
155155
155
Overcompensation
Overcompensation refers to an excessive attempt to overcome feelings of inferiority and
inadequacy by engaging in other activities. The key word here is excessive or extreme. For
example, if Tommy worked day and night fixing cars and declared he would continue doing it
until he was the most outstanding mechanic in the whole city, he would be overcompensating.
This is an extreme case of, “I’ll show them what I can do!”
When you undermine your abilities and make self depreciating statements, you may be using a
form of overcompensation. You overcompensate for your lack of skill by making yourself sound
worse than you are, hoping someone will come to your aid. By doing so you hope someone will
tell you that you aren’t as bad as you think you are.
Sublimation
Sublimation is a special type of compensation. When a socially unacceptable motive involving
aggression or sex is directed into a socially useful or acceptable channel, this type of
compensation is called sublimation. The energy of the original negative impulse finds other
suitable outlets, thus reducing tension and leading to satisfying behaviour. Sublimation channels
energy into intellectual, humanitarian, artistic and cultural pursuits for the benefit of all. For
example, a poet may be upset with a terrible injustice and may write vivid, profound poetry.
Sublimation is a kind of transformation of energy in which the progression is from something
which is crude or unacceptable to a more “sublime” type of motivation or one with higher social
value.
The use of sublimation as a defense mechanism often results in creative activity that can become
valuable to society. When a person uses sublimation as a defense mechanism, the person is
actually modifying a primitive urge in order to conform to society. For example, a young man falls
in love with a girl whom he cannot marry. Later in life he becomes a famous artist.
Projection
Projection refers to the behaviour in which a
person alleviates anxiety about his or her own
motives by attributing those motives to other
people. A person may blame someone else for
their own shortcomings or unacceptable
beliefs. By associating these qualities with other
people, individuals are putting a distance
between the undesirable quality and themselves
thereby reducing anxiety. People who fear they
have faults often take the aggressive approach
by blaming others. They accuse everyone but
themselves of having intolerable impulses. For example, a student has the urge to cheat on an
exam; the student blames fellow classmates for being a group of cheaters instead. That makes the
rest of the class look bad instead of the student.
overcompensation
–  overcoming
feelings  of
weakness or
inferiority  by
putting  forth  a
superhuman  effort
sublimation –
channelling
sexual or aggres-
sive energy into
more socially
acceptable
endeavours
projection –
putting  the  blame
on others for
one’s own
shortcomings

156156
156156
1 5 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Introjection
As social beings, we all seek acceptance from others. An individual uses introjection
or takes onto themselves an attribute or characteristic that belongs to someone else with
the hope of gaining acceptance from others. That is, by becoming like the admired
group they will be accepted into the circle of friendship. For example, if you wish to
join a group of girls that have a reputation for being real tomboys, you will deliberately
imitate their style, mannerisms, and interests in order to be accepted by them.
Identification
Identification is a process by which a person
adopts the values, mannerisms, clothing, and
hairstyles of an idol or hero. For example,
Peter took the sweater number of his favourite
hockey player. Peter used the same hockey
moves on the ice and even began talking like
his idol did in interviews. Sometimes prisoners
begin to identify with their captors. We found
that was true when people were held hostage
for some time and the Stockholm Syndrome
was exhibited. Some people identify with
sports celebrities or popular entertainers.
Sometimes a friend or family member may be
the person’s idol. An individual who always
finds satisfaction by identifying with the
accomplishments of others may neglect setting
their own goals for personal success.
Introjection and identification seem very
similar. What is the key difference between the
two of them? The basic motive for both
defense mechanisms is the same—conforming
in order to gain acceptance. Introjection, however,  tends to be group-oriented, while
identification is usually individually-oriented.
Procrastination
Procrastination refers to a person’s attempt to avoid anxiety by putting off an undesirable
task and therefore getting temporary relief from the stressful situation. By procrastinating, a
person reduces fear of failure by postponing that possibility. For example, a student
may procrastinate or delay starting work on a difficult project or term paper. Setting
aside a problem or running away from it reduces the fear of coming face-to-face with
something that is overwhelming in case we fail in our efforts.
introjection –
taking  on  the
characteristics  of
others in order to
gain  acceptance
from them
identification –
adopting  the
behaviour  and
mannerisms of
someone who is
admired
procrastination –
putting  off  or
delaying a task to
avoid  the
possibility  of
failure

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
157157
157157
157
Displaced Aggression
Displaced aggression is a reaction involving the transfer of emotion from the person or
object that caused the emotion to a safer or less threatening person or object. We sometimes
direct our anger not at the cause of the anger but at a target that will not retaliate. For
example, if you have had a bad day at work and your car engine stalls on the drive home,
you may get out and kick the tires. That is displacement of aggression from frustrations at
work to kicking the tires.
Two general rules seem to characterize displaced aggression. The new object of aggression
must have certain features in common with the original object. At the same time the new
object must be different from the original one to some degree, or the person will be inhibited
from showing aggression towards it.
Rationalization
Rationalization is the process of finding good reasons
to replace real reasons. The real reason is not an
acceptable one and is either repressed or denied.
Rationalization is similar to making excuses or alibis.
People explain their behaviour in terms of socially
approved reasons. When people use rationalization,
they attempt to deceive themselves. The explanation for
their behaviour saves their sense of pride. For example,
you are shopping for a sweater and see two you like.
The store clerk gives you the price of both sweaters and
one is extremely expensive so you choose the other
one. You tell everyone you chose this sweater because it
had the best style and fit. You are rationalizing because
you don’t want to admit that the other sweater was too
expensive for you. The key phrase linked to
rationalization is not giving true reasons for your
actions.
Regression
Regression involves retreating to an earlier or simpler developmental level requiring less
mature responses. Fear is one of the usual reasons why a person runs away from a situation.
Even well adjusted people may regress on occasion in order to reduce anxiety or stress. For
example, daydreaming is a regressive activity; it involves withdrawing into the self to secure
pleasure by wish fulfillment. Another example is inventing an imaginary illness in order to
gain sympathy and attention from others. Bursting into tears at the slightest hint of frustration
or getting drunk are further examples of regression.
Sometimes regressive behaviour is clearly childish in nature. For example, Sue had a hard
day at work. As soon as she got home, she curled up in bed with her teddy bear.
displaced
aggression –
transferring
hostility from the
original  source  of
frustration  to  a
person or object
not  directly
associated  with  it
rationalization –
justifying  one’s
behaviour  by
giving  false
reasons that are
more socially
acceptable  than
the real reasons
regression –
retreating to a
less mature, more
childish  level  of
behaviour  which
seems like a safer
way to meet
problems

158158
158158
1 5 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Negative Aspects of Defense Mechanisms
All defense mechanisms are self deceptive in nature and are employed by people when
they feel threatened. All people use a number of defense mechanisms suggesting that
people often feel threatened at some time or another in their lives. Continual,
indiscriminate use of defense mechanisms can have unhealthy consequences in the long
run because people are merely treating the symptoms rather than the causes. Defense
mechanisms reduce the guilt and anxiety, but do not remove the factors producing the
threat. For example, Daniel continually used projection when he faced failure in a task.
He never seriously thought about his own deficiencies and how he could correct them.
In summary, when defense mechanisms become the dominant mode of problem
solving, an individual wastes great time and energy maintaining the defense
mechanisms. The person directs little effort into constructive work which could be
useful in solving the problem. In extreme cases abusing defense mechanisms may lead
to personality maladjustment.
Positive Aspects of Defense Mechanisms
When used in moderation, defense mechanisms can help people adjust to tough
situations. They can absorb the shock of unpleasant reality until the person is able to
face the facts. Defense mechanisms may provide temporary protection from problems
that might initially be too overwhelming. Defense mechanisms allow the person to develop
proper problem solving techniques without intense pressures. For example, the immediate
reaction of anyone being told of the death of a loved one is denial. The person simply
refuses to accept the situation as true. Such statements as “No! It’s not possible!” are often
used. Later the person will normally accept the fact over a period of time which gives the
individual a chance to recover.
Defense mechanisms, when used as a stopgap measure, may allow experimentation
with new kinds of behaviour and new roles. The demand for an immediate response to
a problem can lead to tension and poor solutions because of anxiety. Defense
mechanisms can rectify this with a relaxed, less pressurized approach to a situation. For
example, an unpleasant occurrence may cause a person to use rationalization to “save
face.” Once the person is alone and away from the pressures of the situation, they can
let down that guard and face the problem realistically. Defense mechanisms are an
important rescue system in a variety of crises.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
159159
159159
159
Nurturing  Our  Positive  Emotions
What can we do to conquer negative emotions? How can we develop the inner strength
to enable us to meet all challenges in our lives? People need a balance of physical,
emotional, and mental support. Let’s look at some
useful ideas.
Developing Physical Strengths
An apple a day...
Cultivate and maintain good health habits. Mind and
body work as one. Getting enough rest and sleep,
balanced meals, and adequate exercise are all essential
elements. Keep your weight at a healthy level. Eat
breakfast. Avoid alcohol and cigarettes. Have regular
medical check ups. Avoid excessive sugar or fats.
Exercise is very important. Regular, moderate physical exercise is one of the best ways
to increase self-esteem, boost a person’s sense of power, and stimulate creativity. It can
make people more emotionally resilient. Positive health habits can increase life
expectancy by up to 15 years.
Developing Emotional Strengths
A friend in need...
Find a person you can confide in, and talk out your
troubles. The term catharsis means relieving
emotional tensions by verbalizing one’s feelings. By
sharing problems with others we might be
comforted in knowing that many others have had
the same problems and managed to conquer them.
We may be too emotionally involved in a situation
to think about it clearly, but friends can give us an
objective perspective. Circles of support will add
to your well being.
Reach out. In social relationships, learn to be
considerate and develop the quality of caring. Be
temperate in your criticism of others. Sincerity is
another valuable asset. Develop that intensity of
understanding and relating to other people, namely
empathy. Search for some worthwhile causes in
life and pursue them.
catharsis –
releasing
emotional
tensions  by
openly  discussing
problems

160160
160160
1 6 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Developing Mental Strengths
When the kettle boils...
Use constructive work or active leisure interests to release or reduce negative emotions
such as anger, hostility, and tension. We must admit to aggression and other related feelings
before these emotions can be channelled into positive projects.
Maintain a positive outlook. Look at the humourous side of a situation. When you are
confronted by too many demands, slow down, and take one problem at a time. This allows
you a better chance to remain calm and in control of anxiety. Realize that life is full of
changes and be ready to adapt to the changes you face. Be reasonable in setting levels for
achievement, neither too high (leading to frustration) or too low (leading to lack of interest).
Job satisfaction is extremely important for good mental and physical health. Some studies
suggest a close relationship between job enjoyment and the prediction of longevity. Work
and leisure should complement each other.
Relax, relax
Mediation is a remedy for stress practised by
many people. Meditation is a relaxation
technique which allows the person to get in
touch with their true inner nature. Relaxation
makes a person healthier, but there is a
spiritual aspect as well which helps the soul
as well as the body. Slow breathing has a
very calming effect. Another relaxation
technique is to imagine something that is
serene and peaceful. Mediation has been
shown to reduce blood pressure and ease
emotional tension.
Sometimes the best way to tackle problems
is to get away from them for a while enabling
you to get a fresh start when you return.
Keep smiling!

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
161161
161161
161
Emotional  Support  From  Pets
Companion animals contribute a great deal to the physical, mental, and emotional
health of their human friends. Long time animal owners know this fact. Now it has
been documented in many research studies as well. In our fast-paced, urban society,
people tend to be more isolated from extended family members than ever before. Pets
fill the void of isolation people experience more and more often. Pets offer
unconditional love. For people with mental health problems or delinquency problems,
pets provide the opportunity for these people to take responsibility to care for another
living creature.
Pets have a very calming influence on their human partners and have a positive effect
on people’s moods. Human-animal bonding reduces stress and anxiety, diffuses tension
in our lives, improves cardiovascular health, heightens one’s sense of self-esteem, and
increases one’s sense of security.
Pet therapy has been used extensively in a number of different institutions. Dogs and
cats visit various care facilities like hospital rooms of the terminally ill, extended care
institutions for the elderly, institutions for the mentally ill, and even a variety of places
of incarceration.
Pets appear to love one and all without
discrimination. They also display a deep
sense of trust in people which is very
therapeutic. Pets give people who are ill and
dependent a sense of dignity. Pets generate a
feeling of being needed which gives patients
the opportunity to practise their nurturing
skills. The overall health of some of the
fragile elderly has improved as they
anticipate regular visits from four-legged
friends. Some people who shrink from
communicating with human beings will
break that barrier and talk to their pet friends.
Pets act as an important social lubricant. In
some cases pets have proven to be more
effective in helping the ill than either drug
treatment or counselling.

162162
162162
1 6 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Calming  Our  Emotions  Through  Touch
In our society, people are out of touch with one of their most important senses, touch.
Touch has become forbidden in our minds because we weren’t touched a great deal by
our parents when we were children.
Now we have put up barriers against
touch. Usually touch has been
related to sex in some way and that
is why people are reluctant to reach
out to others with touch.
We can communicate many things
through touch that cannot be
conveyed by the spoken word.
Touch is our first sense as newborns.
Touch expresses many things—
relaxation, healing, friendship, and
love to name a few. When
therapeutic touch is used to heal
others, energy is transferred from the
hands of the practitioner to the
patient by moving the hands close to
the skin.
When people refrain from touch on a
long term basis, they are isolating
themselves from an important avenue of contact with others. We become lonely and
addicted to material things instead of what we can do for others. Physical isolation from
others can reduce our capacity for growth. If young animals are deprived of touch from
their parents, especially their mothers, they tend to grow up to be more violent and
aggressive.
Many people who yearn for touch hire professional massage therapists to provide that
physical contact. Massage reduces two stress hormones. For some people massage
relaxes them; others feel alive and energized after massage. Massage therapy helps
many ailments from migraines to muscle tension, depression, anxiety, and high blood
pressure. Some massage therapists say some of their most rewarding contact is with
lonely, elderly widows who crave a caring touch from someone.
Touch has played a key role in the miracle recovery of some hospital patients who were
seriously ill and sometimes even unconscious. The power of touch linked them to their
loved ones. Touch played a major role in bringing them back to health from that dark
abyss.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
163163
163163
163
Criminal  Statistics
To many people our world is becoming more and more violent and riddled with crime as
each year passes. News on television and on the radio carry detailed stories of the latest
victims and their aggressors. The newspapers are full of ongoing incidents of crime. Our
conclusion is that crime is sweeping the country and increasing in epidemic proportions. But
is that perception accurate?
A General Social Survey conducted in 1988 and again in 1993 revealed some interesting
statistics describing crime in Canada. In the many different categories of crime there had
been little change at all in the rates. This included crimes such as sexual assault, assault,
robbery, break and enter, motor vehicle theft, theft of personal or household property,
and vandalism.
SOMECRIMESTATISTICSFOREDMONTON
NUMBER OF
OCCURRENCES
889198910991199129913991
HOMICIDE724272027272
ROBBERY400161113221076129619521
SEXUALRELATED006159414261238163818061
ASSAULT805581858276538682662136

164164
164164
1 6 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Where did many of the crimes take place? The statistics show a shift in the location of
crimes from private residences to public places. The amount of household victimization
decreased over the five year period between 1988 and 1993 for such crimes as break and
enters, motor vehicle thefts, and vandalism. Most offenders acted alone and without
weapons.
When you compare the 1988 to 1993 statistics to the more current figures below, you see
how the number of crimes have changed over time.
Homiciderefers to murder (first and second degree), manslaughter, criminal
negligence causing death.
Robberyincludes extortion, extortion (libel), robbery with a firearm or offensive
weapon (Note: it does not include break and entry into homes, for
example.)
Sexual Relatedincludes aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, anal
intercourse, bestiality, incest, sexual interference, invitation to sexual
touch, indecent acts, sexual exploitation, exposure to children under 14
years.
Assaultmeans discharge weapon with intent, criminal negligence (causing injury),
aggravated assault, causing bodily harm (if a weapon is involved),
assaulting a police officer, or assaulting another officer, criminal
harassment.
Courtesy of the Edmonton City Police
*  For a detailed breakdown of these categories, please visit the Edmonton Police Service’s Internet
website at www.police.edmonton.ab.ca
CITY OFEDMONTON
NUMBER OF
OCCURRENCES*
99910002CHANGE
NUMBER OF CASES
SOLVED
HOMICIDE
0212%0.5+%09
ROBBERY
49219621%9.1-%53
SEXR-ELATED
269378%3.9-%65
ASSAULT
83158155%4.7+%18

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
165165
165165
165
Are Crime Rates Increasing?
Of course, a great deal of crime takes place that is not reported
to the police for various reasons. In 1993, household break and
enters were the crimes most likely reported to the police and
sexual assaults were the least likely reported crimes. The only
crime that showed a substantial increase in reporting to police
was robbery. Sometimes crimes are not reported because they
are perceived to be too minor, victims feel the police could do
nothing about it anyway, or in some cases there may be a fear of
revenge, or deep feelings of shame. Half of the people in
Canada reported that they keep their doors locked at all times,
even when they are at home. About two-thirds of Canadians say
they still feel safe walking in their own neighbourhoods at night,
but each year people are reporting more concerns about their safety.
With these statistics in mind, why do people have the perception that crime rates are
increasing dramatically? An increase in crime statistics makes the news because the media
finds information such as that gains attention from the public. When crime rates tend to
remain stable or even decrease slightly, that is considered a bit boring. People tend to focus
on information that is dramatic, vivid, intense, and somewhat frightening.
People are most concerned with situations where they will become victims of violent crimes.
Statistics such as those you examined for the city of Edmonton indicate that Canadians are
not at a higher risk of this happening today than they were five years earlier.
The  Psychology  of  Victimization
At some time in your life you face the possibility of becoming a victim of some type of
crime. A great deal of time is devoted to studying criminals. What is the personal, emotional
impact of becoming a victim?
It is relatively common now for people who have been victims of crime (or in the case of
murder, the surviving relatives) to make victim impact statements to the court during the
trial of the offender. A victim impact statement is simply a paragraph or two about how the
victims have been personally affected by the crime. It is saying, “Yesterday I was a normal
member of society. Because of the crime, my life has changed in the following way...” It is
important for victims to be heard and to know that they have had the opportunity to “have
their say” in public. They are the innocent victims and in many cases their lives have been
irrevocably altered by the act of crime. Simply making a statement can’t undo the terrible
damage that has been done to these victims. But in the process of voicing their hurt, victims
experience healing and their faith in the process of justice is restored somewhat.

166166
166166
1 6 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The feelings experienced by the victim of a crime cover a broad range of reactions
depending on the serious nature of the crime and whether the perpetrator of the criminal act
was known to them or a stranger. Victim trauma syndrome is the intense reaction that is
experienced resulting from the abuse a person suffers during a crime. Many people report
they feel “violated” in some way. They feel singled out, punished, isolated, unclean, and
damaged either physically or psychologically. The question that keeps coming back to their
mind is, “Why me?” An overwhelming sense of fear and insecurity may develop often
leading to nightmares. A person may experience fatigue, disturbances in sleep patterns,
tension headaches, intense guilt, and self-blame. Accompanying those ailments are an
overpowering fear of physical violence and death. It is little wonder that the justice system
gives victims a chance to have their say in court. This procedure returns to victims a little
sense of power and control in their lives that was taken away when the crime was
committed.
Violence In The Home
Violence is physically and psychologically damaging when it occurs. When the home
becomes a place of violence, the impact can be crippling for family members. The home is
our basic source of security enabling us to grow and take a position as a productive
member of society. When violence occurs in the home, growth and development are no
longer the focus; the family member or members are simply interested in survival.
When violence occurs in the home, the father or father figure is the perpetrator in many
cases. However, sometimes the wife and mother is the abuser which seems to occur with
increasing frequency. She may abuse both her children and her husband. Men who are
abused by their wives are usually silent about the violence that is aimed at them. They feel
ashamed that they are being terrorized by a woman because it destroys their masculine
image.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
167167
167167
167
Let’s look at the more common case of the husband dominating his wife with physical
or psychological violence. Sometimes only the wife is abused in the initial stages, but
later on the children may become subject to abuse as well. Some wives tolerate years of
abuse, but when the children also become victims, they realize they must take action.
Vast amounts of money from both the government and private donations are poured into the
building and maintenance of women’s shelters where women and their children can find a
safe haven if they choose to run away from an abusive husband and father. These men see
women as their property to do with as they wish instead of equal marriage partners. The
men feel a deep urge to control their wives and use violence to accomplish this goal. It may
happen more often when women become independent and enter the work force. Some men
may feel frustrated for one reason or another and have not learned proper anger
management. A high portion of battering men come from homes where their fathers beat
their mothers.
Women have reported a wide range of injuries at the hands of their partners. Some include
beating, choking, slapping, being thrown around, assault with a weapon, and suffering many
degrading sexual indignities. They have had broken bones, bruises to all parts of their
bodies, cuts, black eyes and other injuries to the face. Often the control and the violence
begins with minor things like a slap or a punch and eventually the cycle of violence escalates
and becomes more brutal and life threatening. Some women say they have been abused
even while they are pregnant. Many wives report that as the constant terror continues, they
begin playing a number of “mind games” to avoid injury. They learn to read their husband’s
moods and stay out of their way. They learn to obey his every command like a small child
so they will not antagonize him when he is in a bad mood. These women usually have a very
low self-esteem. They feel stupid and unworthy. Some may even believe that they are “bad”
in some way and deserve this kind of treatment.

168168
168168
1 6 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
It is important for people to appear “normal” to the outside world. Battered families feel
ashamed of the terror they experience. Family members who are abused go to great lengths
to give the semblance of a normal family to their friends and community. Women hide their
bruised faces with makeup and dark sunglasses. They make excuses for what happened
by saying they have been clumsy and injured themselves. They wear long-sleeved
clothing to hide bruises on their arms. Alcohol abuse is often a great factor in setting off
an abusive rage. Afterwards the husband may shower his wife with gifts, cry, say he is
sorry and it will never happen again, and beg her forgiveness. Unless he has had some
intervention counselling, these feelings of remorse are only temporary until the next
beating episode occurs.
After many years of injuries, women develop the battered wife syndrome. In this very
delicate mental state, a woman has intense fear for her safety and perhaps her life every
waking moment. Overpowering fear may eventually push her to the brink and she may take
drastic action—killing him before she fears he will kill her. The battered wife syndrome has
been successfully used by some lawyers defending their female clients when these women
have finally murdered their male partners. One report brings forward the chilling statistic that
women are most likely to be killed by people they have formed a relationship with (less than
one tenth are killed by strangers). Women are more likely to be killed in their own homes
more than anywhere else.
One solution for reducing the violence against women in the home is to give more social and
economic support to women in order to reduce their dependency on the men who abuse
them. At one time a woman had to lay charges against her husband herself when abuse
occurred. Many women were terrified to do that for fear that the husband would seek a
vicious form of revenge. Now the police will automatically take action on her behalf and will
lay an assault charge on the abusive spouse. It is easier to avoid entering an abusive
relationship than to escape once you are involved. Therefore the following article should be
read very carefully.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
169169
169169
169
 
Dear Ann Landers:
 Please print this
list of warning signals to help womendetermine if a mate or date is apotential (or actual) batterer.
1.
Jealously of your time with co-
workers, friends and family.
2.
Controlling  behaviour.
(Controls your comings and goingsand your money and insists on“helping” you make personaldecisions.)
3.
Isolation. (Cuts you off from
all supportive resources such astelephone pals and colleagues atwork.)
4.
Blames other for his problems.
(Unemployment, family quarrels –everything is “your fault.”)
5.
Hypersensitivity. (Easily upset
by annoyances that are a part ofdaily life, such as being asked towork overtime, criticism of anykind, being asked to help withchores or child care.)
6.
Cruelty to animals or children.
(Insensitive to their pain andsuffering, may tease and/or hurtchildren and animals.)
7.
“Playful” use of force in sex.
(May throw you down and hold youduring sex. May start having sexwith you when you are sleeping ordemand sex when you are ill ortired.)
8.
Verbal abuse. (Says cruel and
hurtful things, degrades andhumiliates you, wakes you up toverbally abuse you or doesn’t letyou go to sleep.)
9.
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
personality. (Sudden mood swingsand  unpredictable  behaviour  –  oneminute loving, the next minuteangry  and  punitive.)
10.
Past history of battering. (Has
hit others but has a list of excuses forhaving been “pushed over theedge.”)11.    Threats of violence. (Says, “I’llslap you,” “I’ll kill you” or “I’llbreak your neck.”)12.    Breaking or striking objects.(Breaks your possessions, beats onthe table with fists, throws objectsnear or at you or your children.)13.    Uses force during an argument.(Holds you down or against a wall,pushes, shoves, slaps or kicks you.This type of behaviour can easilyescalate to choking, stabbing, orshooting.)Ann, please tell you readers theydon’t have to accept violentbehaviour from anyone – mates,dates, parents, or friends. Becausenearly half of all North Americanwomen will be battered at some timein their lives, they need to know howto read the warning signs.Tell them help is as close as thetelephone. Any woman who seesherself in the column today should
call the nearest women’s crisis lineand tell someone what is happening.She will be provided with supportand safety options.There are several ways to break thecycle of violence, and identifyingthe warning signs is the first step. –Portland, Ore.Dear Oregon:
 Thank you for an
extremely important letter. This maybe difficult to believe, but somewomen do not realize that they arebeing abused until someone points itout to them. They have been made tobelieve that abusive treatment iswhat they deserve.I hope the women who seethemselves in today’s column willcheck out the nearest women’sshelter or domestic violence hot lineand keep the phone number handy. Itcould save their lives.Readers may write to Ann Landersc/o The Journal, CommunityRelations Dept., Box 2421,Edmonton, Alta., T5J 2S6.
AnnLanders
Advice
Thirteen warning signs may help women avoid the cycle of violence
Checklist against batterers
F8   
The Edmonton
 
Journal, Saturday, December 3, 1994

170170
170170
1 7 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
By the time the average young 
person has reached the teen years, 
he/she has been exposed to a 
quarter of a million acts of violence 
on TV.
Each evening an average of six or 
seven acts of violence and two 
homicides appear during prime 
time viewing.
Effects Of Violence In The Media
Violence is invited into our homes on a daily basis through the media of television. Of course
violence is referred to in other media as well (radio and newspapers), but the effects of
violence through television are by far the most dramatic and negative. How bad is the
influence of violence on television? Is it an overreaction? Let’s look at a few statistics.
Two types of programs that the average person may believe to be harmless can, in fact, be
the worst offenders for violence. One is cartoons where characters shower each other with
repeated acts of aggression, in an attempt to portray comedy. A “real person” would be
dead or seriously injured by any one of these behaviours, but the cartoon characters get up,
brush themselves off, and continue. This may give small children the idea that they can hit
their brothers or sisters on the head with something, and there won’t be serious
consequences.
The other type of television program that can have quite a negative impact on viewers is the
news. News programs can be upsetting because we realize these events have actually
happened. When viewers see the negative coverage condensed into a one hour or half hour
news broadcast, they may conclude that there is more violence than there actually is.
When people are immersed in scenes of violence on television, 95% of the studies affirm
that a person’s attitudes, values, and often their behaviour will be affected. In other words,
there is a correlation or a connection between seeing violence and aggressive behaviour.
Exposure to violence in the media desensitizes people. Once desensitized to violence,
people are more likely to become tolerant of violence in the real world. In some cases,
people are no longer hesitant to use violence against others.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
171171
171171
171
198619871988198919901991199219931994199519961997
Rates of Youth (Age 12-17) Homicide, Canada: 1986-1997 
3.00
2.50
1.5
1.00
2.00
0.50
0.00
Rate per 100,000 Population
Studies confirm that children become very aggressive in their behaviour after watching
a violent episode on TV. Studies show that television violence has more of an effect on
children who are academically low achievers and on those who are naturally aggressive. To
predict violent behaviour in adults, look at violent behaviour in children. One of the main
predictors of adult criminality is early exposure to television violence.
What can be done to reduce the amount of violent programming on television? If the public
does not watch this type of program, it will quickly disappear because television producers
and distributors are very sensitive to their ratings. There are other positive ways that parents
can control their children’s experience with television material. First, children are highly
influenced by their parents’ viewing habits especially during the younger years of their lives.
Parents can set limits on the types of shows their children are allowed to watch. Parents can
watch programs with their children. They can discuss and challenge television so that
children will learn to develop critical and analytical skills as viewers.
Youth Crime And The Young Offenders’ Act
In recent years, many people across Canada have voiced extreme displeasure with our
current Young Offenders’ Act. They have written letters to the editors of newspapers,
phoned in to talk shows to complain, and have signed petitions by the thousands asking for
changes.
Most people have a perception of the average criminal to be an adult male. But when a
young person commits a violent crime, that notion is shattered. It is upsetting to learn that a
young person is responsible for such destructive behaviour. When young Canadians commit
homicide, the targets for their vengeance are: parents (15% of the time), other family
members (20%), total strangers (30%), and friends and acquaintances (35%). If they
commit homicide, younger children are more likely to kill family members. Most frequently,
youth homicides involve males killing other males. Female killers are responsible for only
about 10% of the youth homicides.
How serious is youth crime? Earlier in this lesson you learned how the media can deeply
affect our perceptions about a situation. Let’s look at some statistics on youth crime.

172172
172172
1 7 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
We do know that vandalism and theft have increased somewhat. There seems to be an
increasing trend in the incidents of gang activity and gang violence. Teenage assaults are
carried out for a variety of reasons: to steal special kinds of clothing, for initiation into a
gang, and to dominate weaker peers. Extortion of money or goods occurs when a stronger
person intimidates a weaker one to meet certain demands in order to avoid a robbery or
beating. Another slang name for this activity is “taxing”. Sometimes swarmings occur
whereby a young person is surrounded by a gang of teenagers and is assaulted or robbed in
a flurry of violence. Often the victim is silenced by the fact that the assault was perpetrated
by a gang in their immediate area who could attack once again if the gang’s identity is
revealed.
What factors have caused the public to believe that youth crime is out of control in Canada?
Schools and communities have developed a Zero Tolerance Policy regarding altercations
between young people. In the past, a school yard fight would have been resolved between
school administration, parents, the students involved, and maybe the police. With a zero
tolerance policy toward aggressive or violent behaviour, many of these incidents now come
before the courts even when assaults are relatively minor in nature.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
173173
173173
173
Many people blame the wording and enforcement of the Young Offenders Act (YOA)
as the cause of many of the problems with delinquent young people. What are some of
the reasons? The Young Offenders Act was passed in 1984. It governs young people
involved in criminal activity between the ages of 12 and 18 years of age. A child under
12 years is not considered criminally responsible for his/her actions. The YOA specifies
much shorter terms for juvenile offenders. For example, three years is the maximum
sentence a young person receives for the more serious crimes of aggravated assault and
murder. The names and photographs of young offenders cannot be published or made
know to the public. Although the reasons behind these rules might be worthy, they can
lead to serious problems. For example, the police find it difficult to apprehend
dangerous young offenders because their identities cannot be made known to the
public. Therefore it is not possible for the public to provide tips leading to an arrest.
Also, many children under 12 are used by older criminals to commit crimes or conceal
evidence because these children have immunity from being convicted.
What are some of the reasons behind youth crime?
Family problems are at the top of the list. Some
children are abused, there are serious conflicts in
the home, and parents themselves might be
involved in criminal activities. Some families live in
crippling conditions of poverty. Authority of the
parents has been seriously undermined in some
cases. Some young criminals come from one
parent homes. The parent in charge is too
overwhelmed by many other concerns including
economic ones to give the children the attention
they need. One sociologist boldly stated that the
single most effective thing to do to reduce the
crime rate would be to put money into programs
that would reduce the number of pregnant teens
who are not prepared for the responsibility of
child-rearing.
Besides making changes in the home life of disadvantaged youngsters, school problems can
contribute to criminal tendencies. A child who faces continual failure and conflict in the
school may drift into a life of crime. A young person’s drug or alcohol abuse with delinquent
friends may be quite innocent at first, but it can lead to more serious types of antisocial
behaviour and eventually into the world of crime.

174174
174174
1 7 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Kleptomania
The deep-seated urge to steal things is known as kleptomania. The kleptomaniac may
steal from retail stores or even items from the homes of friends and acquaintances. Most
kleptomaniacs are women (up to 90%), but young boys and young men may also be
involved.
What are some of the unique features of kleptomania? First, stealing does not occur
because the person needs the item and does not have the money to buy it. The
kleptomaniac often comes from financially comfortable families. They usually don’t use the
items they steal but just accumulate them in a collection, or they may even throw the articles
away. They may steal the same kind of article over and over.
What are some of the reasons for kleptomania? The emotions that arise during the acts of
theft are very similar to those of sexual excitement. There is a lot of danger associated with
the act of stealing which is illegal. The kleptomaniac associates this tension with sexual
excitement and gratification.
On the other hand, some kleptomaniacs are not stimulated in a sexual way by stealing items.
In these cases motivation may come from lack of emotional warmth during childhood or
from harsh treatment by parents or guardians. These kleptomaniacs steal for revenge against
people who are linked to parental authority like store owners or the police.
It has been noted that a female
kleptomaniac’s urge to steal is often strongest
during her menstrual period possibly due to
the fact that emotional control is weakest at
this time because of hormonal changes. (This
is simply an observation, not an excuse.)
The kleptomaniac does not plan in advance to
steal something. Usually at an opportune time,
the person has an overpowering impulse to
take an item. Unsuccessfully they try to talk
themselves out of doing this deed and
eventually take the item. Once they have
stolen, they are overcome by tremendous
feelings of guilt, humiliation, and remorse.
They are seized by the need for punishment
which may explain why they continue to steal
in an unskillful manner until they are caught.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
175175
175175
175
Pyromania
The compulsive urge to set fires is known as pyromania. The pyromaniac should not be
confused with the arsonist whose goal in starting a fire is tied with some type of financial gain
like collecting insurance money or destroying a business that is not profitable. But please be
aware that anyone who intentionally or recklessly starts a fire will be charged with arson.
Most fires are set for fraudulent reasons (to collect insurance money). Some fires are started
to cover up a crime like homicide or theft; the fire damages the evidence. Then there are the
pyromaniacs which we will discuss now.
What are some of the reasons behind the pyromaniac’s dangerous and destructive
behaviours? First, some want to show a defiant response to authority. They want to show
rebellion against the law and they view the police as authority figures like their fathers for
example. A second reason is linked to hostility and aggression stemming from rejection in
childhood. By setting fires which endanger lives and property, the pyromaniac is satisfying
aggressive, destructive urges that were unresolved from childhood. The pyromaniac delights
in setting a fire because it is a very powerful agent of destruction with which he can identify.
The third motive is linked to sexual excitement and sexual conflict. The person may
associate fire with sexual stimulation and expression. Many words in our language connect
fire and sexual excitement. For example: “flames of passion”, “playing with fire” (when you
willingly go into a sexually dangerous situation), “being on fire” with sexual arousal, feeling
“hot” or excited about someone.

176176
176176
1 7 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
All of the activities surrounding a fire are dangerous and exciting which adds to the
fascination. A fire generates power, heat, unpredictability, spontaneity, and brilliant flashes of
light. In addition, there is noise and chaos from the fire itself and from people trying to
control the fire.
Pyromaniacs feel compelled to watch the fires they start and their sexual excitement builds
until they reach a point of gratification. Once that has passed, they may experience intense
feelings of guilt.
Almost every year in the driest season of September, fires race through parts of California.
They destroy homes and the nearby environment. Some of these fires kill people and may
cause animals and family pets to perish if they cannot be rescued in time. Costs are
astronomical. Sometimes natural combustion or lightning is the culprit; sometimes it is a local
pyromaniac.
The  Psychopath
Psychopaths may be described as individuals who continually participate in antisocial acts.
They feel no guilt, remorse, or shame for their wrongdoings. They have a careless disregard
for the rights of others. Psychopaths are devoid of any real feelings and values. They have
no true emotions. They are immune to anxiety or fear and therefore they aren’t worried
about punishment or obeying rules. A psychopath can destroy a colleague, a neighbour, a
member of the family without so much as a backward glance or a flicker of guilt. They have
no genuine loyalties. They have one focus: to be winners themselves even if it is at the
expense of someone else. The “genuine” psychopath can use these qualities to be a sharp
and ruthless business person.
Psychopaths appear incapable of either designing or following a life plan with worthwhile
goals. They may be moved to antisocial behaviour without warning and become suddenly
aggressive or violent without provocation or reason. Unfortunately, psychopaths have
developed no sound insights to account for their behaviour so self-improvement can be a
lengthy and difficult process. Basically, they don’t have the will to change or improve.
By now you are probably curious to know how or why a person feels this way. Earlier in
this course you studied Freud and the three parts of the personality—the id, the ego, and
the superego or the conscience. The conscience gives us inner moral principles and a sense
of right and wrong. The psychopath has no conscience. If you asked a psychopath: is
this situation right or wrong, good or bad, they can recite the correct answer. The problem
is they have no commitment to follow through and behave in the correct manner.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
177177
177177
177
In summary, these characteristics sum up the psychopath: intelligent, outwardly
charming, vain, impulsive, deceptive, unreliable, callous, insincere, egocentric,
emotionally undeveloped, demanding of immediate need satisfaction, and unresponsive
to interpersonal relationships. They are skilled liars. They are social predators doing
whatever they want to whoever they can trick or control.
Approximately 1% of the population is psychopathic. The observation—once a
psychopath, always a psychopath is likely true. What are some reasons for the
psychopathic misfit? Psychopathy is not a type of mental illness characterized by the onset
of symptoms sometime during one’s life. Many experts now believe that psychopaths are
born, they are not formed from negative elements in their upbringing. Many psychopaths
come from normal loving homes; they are not always the victims of abuse. One theory
suggests that in the psychopath’s formative years, the mechanism which develops the
conscience is faulty. In the shaping of a conscience, the conditioning process involves the
pairing of a stimulus (punishment) with a response (fear, anxiety, guilt). When a person
matures, threats are not necessary to convince the normal person to refrain from antisocial
behaviour; they have become self-disciplined. In the case of the psychopath, the
socialization process just described has been severely interrupted.
Another theory states the origin of the psychopathic personality can be explained by the
parental rejection hypothesis. Some parents make no secret of the fact that they didn’t
want a child in the first place. These unwanted children may be frequently abused by the
parents. Psychopaths are alienated from parents with serious consequences:
•   they disregard social standards and values
•   they disrespect authority in general which they view as an extension of parental
influence
•   they do not develop empathy or emotional identification with others
•   they learn to hate instead of love
There are psychopathic children. Even some preschoolers can show these deviant
characteristics: lack of empathy, fearlessness, being highly active, reacting to others as if they
have no feelings, and not being concerned with respect to other people.
Why is the psychopath so potentially dangerous? Without a conscience, psychopaths are
capable of committing any crime from robbery to murder. Psychopaths can destroy people
they have close relationships with by ruining them financially or tearing them apart
psychologically and emotionally. When people have no concern for their fellow human
beings, then they are indeed seriously crippled in the area of interpersonal relationships.
They don’t see themselves as being abnormal. They aren’t committed to counselling or
therapy. They are not interested in rehabilitation.

178178
178178
1 7 8Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Sexual  Assault
What is sexual assault? Sometimes this crime appears under the heading of rape as well.
It is a deliberate, violent act of sexual degradation. Sometimes sexual intercourse occurs
against a person’s will (with or without injury to the victim). Sometimes it involves touching,
or fondling of a person’s private body parts without their permission. Sexual assault
sometimes includes other forms of violence against the person that occur in conjunction with
the sexual encounter such as beating or slashing, inflicted with or without weapons.
What causes a person to commit sexual assault? Intimidation and fear are used to control
and overpower someone against their will. The rapist has deep feelings of inadequacy which
leads to violence. Rape makes these kind of men feel superior, sexually dominant, and
masculine by use of aggression. The act of rape involves the primary wish to express anger
and rage; seeking sexual gratification is a secondary motive. The rapist ambiguously views
his victim as both a desired person and a despised one. Rape is most commonly a
transgression by men against women, although homosexual rape occurs too. (The topic of
sexual abuse of children was addressed earlier in this lesson.)
Most rapes are planned in advance either by the lone rapist or a gang. Sometimes a
particular victim may be selected prior to the act. Or the idea to rape may be present, and
the selection of a victim is left to chance when someone appears in the wrong spot at an
opportune time for the assailant.
The risk of sexual assault takes place in a variety of situations. Unfortunately women are
more at risk to sexual assault from people they know than from total strangers. Date rape is
one type of assault that is relatively easy for the aggressor because the woman assumes she
is in a safe, friendly, and trusting relationship. Women who are separated or divorced from
their spouses may be under continued risk of sexual assault from former partners in
some circumstances. Gradually the law is recognizing that sexual assault may also
occur in a marriage where one spouse controls the other sexually and may use some
measure of force for sexual gratification.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
179179
179179
179
The risk of sexual assault takes place in a variety of locations as well. Many rapes are
committed when young people hitchhike. About half the sexual assaults occur in a private
place such as the victim’s home, the perpetrator’s home, or in a vehicle.
Unlike victims of other crimes, the issue of resistance or lack of consent is very important
and must be proven to the authorities by the rape victim. A common myth that still persists
regarding rape is that the victim “was asking for it”. Some people hold the stereotype that
the “victim” was an attractive young lady wearing provocative clothing. The facts are quite
different. It is horrifying to know that the youngest known rape victim was a tiny infant and
the oldest recorded rape victim was women in her nineties.
The possibility of being sexually assaulted is a threat to anyone. It means that certain
freedoms of independence cannot be taken for granted. To reduce the threat of rape, a
woman is generally encouraged to conceal her personal identity (on mailboxes, apartment
doors, and telephones) if living alone .

180180
180180
1 8 0Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Something  Extra  –  Cults
The word “cult” denotes mystery, danger, and power. Most people feel a tinge of fear;
others may decide that for all of those reasons cults must be exciting. Originally the word
cult meant strict devotion to a person or thing. That idea sounds innocent enough, doesn’t
it? But a more precise idea of a cult is a group that “uses” and controls its members in ways
that demand strict adherence to the loyalty of the group often with harmful emotional,
psychological, and financial consequences to the cult member.
Cults focus on various themes such as
religion, politics, self-improvement,
and marketing (or moneymaking
projects). Cults purport that they are
the only way to salvation or the only
way to save the world. Many
religious cults are based on Christian
teachings, but the leader (pastor)
assumes dictatorial power unlike a
“normal” church where the pastor and
congregation work together. A white
supremist organization would be an
example of a political cult.
Therapeutic or self-improvement cults
focus on the person’s desire for positive changes. The cult may advertise that they have
found new revolutionary methods or exciting new breakthroughs to reach this goal.
Marketing cults usually target young people who are struggling to find employment. They
may answer newspaper ads that promise challenging, exciting jobs with unbelievable
financial rewards. In the end, these new recruits sell door-to-door or become street
peddlers for little monetary returns.
What are some common characteristics of a cult that distinguish them from ordinary groups?
(Here are a few of the many characteristics.)
•   First, they have a charismatic leader, someone who is dynamic, with a sparkling,
magnetic personality. All successful groups require good leaders, but the cult leader
seems to have an unusual degree of power and charm over the members.
•   Second, although the cult may list idealistic goals, the real reason for its existence is
money, sex, and/or power.
•   Third, the techniques the cult uses to recruit new members are deceptive so the
person will be drawn into the group without being aware of the full implications of
their decision.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
181181
181181
181
•   Fourth, the cult influences and bends the thinking of the individual similar to mind
control activities, which means the cult directs and manipulates the person’s ideas to
suit the objectives of the cult. This is accomplished by subconsciously promoting the
message of the cult in a carefully controlled way, over a period of time. The end result
is that members become completely controlled by the leader. The cult’s method for
recruiting new members and indoctrinating them follows a skillful, well planned
program.
•   Fifth, after a member has been indoctrinated, physical control and even violence is
used to keep the person “in line”. Peer pressure, threats and sometimes physical
confinement are used to maintain strict control and to keep the members from leaving.
•   Finally, to strengthen the control the cult has over the individual, members are
separated from outside friends and especially their families. While the person is being
isolated from their family, they are being showered with affection and attention from
cult members.
Are cults present right here in Alberta? Yes, they may be found in both urban and rural areas
of the province. Where do many of these cults recruit new members? University campuses
are one fertile area for cults to attract new members. (Remember that is only one area for
recruitment.) The idea of cults soliciting members at a place of higher learning is inconsistent
with the image of a cult member as being a gullible, simple-minded person. In fact, many cult
members are very intelligent people, but in the first few months of university life, a person
may feel vulnerable and alone. These students may be brand new to the city and are
experiencing a “down” period in their lives. Cults don’t appeal to the intelligence of the
individual but rather to their emotional void at the time. The cult uses friendship as the initial
bait to attract new recruits. The new university student may be invited to a “gathering”
where they meet friendly and caring cult members. At that point the process of gradually
getting more and more of a commitment from the person begins in earnest.
Some people confuse cults with Satanism (a belief in the devil) or involvement with witches
(wicca, which is paganism or the belief that God exists in everything). Both Satanism and
witchcraft are part of the occult or supernatural.
Young people in their early teens may join a Satanic group for self-gratification or to attain
power over others. Like cult members, occult members are usually very intelligent people,
but are underachievers in what they try to accomplish. People involved in occult groups
usually dabble in the activities for a few years, grow out of it, and move on to more normal
interests. That might make their temporary involvement in something like Satanism seem
innocuous. The truth is, some people get very emotionally dependent on Satanic groups.
Tragically, some individuals may harm themselves physically and may even go as far as
committing suicide.

182182
182182
1 8 2Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Suppose you suspect someone close to you is involved in a cult. What can you do to
make them see the error of such a choice? It is not helpful to begin with direct
confrontation for at least two reasons. First it would cause your loved one to take
offense to your accusations that they have been duped. Secondly, acting openly and
boldly may set up a psychological tug-of-war with the well organized, sophisticated
controls of the cult who will do whatever is in their power to “save” this individual for
the cult. So what can you do? Research the cult in question so that you know what it’s
all about and can plan intelligent counter moves. Then fight fire with fire. If the cult
attracted the member with warmth and friendship, do the same. Be careful not to
condone your loved one’s involvement in the cult. Establish a close relationship with
them, and reminisce about “old times” you had together. Then gradually, step-by-step,
get the person to question the promises and the rituals that the cult enforces. Be careful
about becoming a casualty yourself—be firmly anchored in your own support
mechanism so you can be strong for both yourself and your cult-entangled friend or
family member.
Remember, cults can take many forms, styles, and philosophies. Cults are not illegal but they
are often involved in illegal activities. Ultimately cults will destroy your individuality. Should
you become a cult member, you will lose the power to think for yourself, grow as an
individual, and be your own person. You will be financially drained. Your mind will be empty
of those special qualities that allow you to explore life on your own terms and take whatever
pathways you choose. You may enter these groups believing that you can remain on the
fringe and maintain your independence, but cult philosophy is wise and cunning in either
unconsciously drawing total commitment from you, or casting you aside if you cannot be
melded to their ways which means you are no longer useful to them.
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Detective Hugh Frey of
the Edmonton City Police in preparing material for this section.
Optional Reading – Criminal Profiles:  Analyzing Homicides
When a homicide occurs, police investigators must do a psychological analysis of the
darkest side of human behaviour. For all normal human beings, the topic of murder is
distasteful, but it is also fascinating to discover how this frightening aspect of human
behaviour is analyzed in the absence of actual witnesses. Some of you may not want to read
or contemplate this topic. Therefore the final section of this lesson is completely optional.
The most dramatic and sensational of all crimes is murder. At first one might think that
murder is murder, but there are over fifteen different categories of homicide. Let’s name a
few of them:  contract killing, gang-motivated, kidnap murder, product tampering
homicide, drug murder, insurance inheritance-related homicide, felony murder (property
crime is the motive), personal cause homicide (for example domestic homicide),

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
183183
183183
183
erotomania (for example murder involving a fantasy based on romantic love), revenge
killing, argument/conflict murder, authority killing (for example the dismissed employee
believes they have been wronged by the authority figure), extremist homicide for
political or religious reasons, hostage murder, sexual homicide, group cause homicide
(for example a cult murder), and mercy homicide (for example the case of a person
helping a terminally ill person to die). Mass murder involves the homicides of more than
three people. A spree murder involves a continual murder that occurs between more
than two locations. Serial murders mean separate homicides by the same person over a
period of time.
In the absence of witnesses to the homicide, police investigators face an extremely difficult
task because the victim is deceased and cannot provide information. In almost all cases, the
offenders will not be helpful in supplying evidence damaging to themselves. So investigators
must study other data to piece together the story of the tragedy. The investigation of a
homicide studies three important elements: background of the victim, an analysis of the
crime scene, and the nature of the exchange between the criminal and the victim. The first
two elements are called primary sources of physical evidence. Evidence is called the silent
witness because it can be used to reveal who the offender is and what the motive was.
Secondary sources of evidence would be information that is recovered from the offender’s
residence. Forensic analysis is conducted on hair, hair fibres, blood, saliva, and semen.
It may seem unusual to begin the investigation by taking a close look at the victims because
they are the innocent party, but answering questions about this individual may lead to the
motive which in turn will lead to the offender. Victimology is victim history which may
explain why a particular person was targeted for the murder. Was the victim known to the
offender? This in-depth information will be considered pertinent in victimology:
employment, income, lifestyle, marital status, reputation, personality, family, friends,
drug/alcohol use, leisure activity, dating habits, and transportation commonly used by
this person.

184184
184184
1 8 4Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Once the victim has been carefully analyzed, the investigator collects data known as
crime scene indicators. How many crime scenes are involved? (Was the body found at
the scene of the homicide?) Did the crime occur indoors or outdoors? Did it occur
during the day or night? Did the crime take place in a busy public area or in a secluded
spot? Can it be predicted how long the offender stayed at the homicide scene? Did the
offender feel comfortable committing the offense in that location? How many offenders
were there? Was the crime scene organized or disorganized indicating if the murder was
premeditated and also reflecting the offender’s level of criminal sophistication. Was the
weapon brought to the crime scene or was it a nearby object? Was the weapon present
at the crime scene after the murder? Was the body openly displayed or was an attempt
made to conceal it? Was the body intentionally arranged in a certain way or left in a
degrading position? Were personal belongings taken from the victim as a kind of
“souvenir” for the offender? What other objects might be missing from the crime scene?
Eventually police investigators might make a series of educated guesses about the offender,
predicting age, racial background, residency, employment or skills, home life, social skills,
and general personality. To be successful, police investigators must put as many pieces of
the puzzle together as possible. The final piece is the offender. Eventually this person will be
caught. Will it be sooner or later?
Summary
This lesson has given us the opportunity to explore a wide array of emotions to give us a
better understanding of this special essence we have as human beings. Many of the
emotions featured have been the more negative ones. We hope that has not been
depressing. By openly discussing negative emotions, we hope to give you a better
perspective of them, so that you can remain in control. You were also given some insights
into the violent, strange, and destructive side of human nature by studying some of the
elements of crime in our society. Her is a quick review  of some of the key elements.
To summarize:
•   Aggression is one emotion that exerts a powerful influence.
•   Somewhat related to aggression is assertiveness which means resolving
problems from a win-win position.
•   Some people believe in the theory that aggression is inherited as one of our
instincts for survival; others believe that aggression is a learned behaviour and
is sparked by frustrating elements in our environment.
•   A highly condemned form of aggression in our society is child abuse. Child
abusers were often abused themselves as children. Child abuse can
become a vicious circle.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:    Studying  Behaviour
185185
185185
185
•   Everyone meets difficult people at some time in their lives. Concentrate on
solving the problem and listen to the concerns of your adversary for some
insights into how to work through the situation.
•   To deal effectively with anger, admit anger, and take time to reflect on your
reasons for responding in that way.
•   Frustration means we meet a roadblock while working toward our goals.
•   Conflicting situations may be:
— approach-approach (both choices are good)
— avoidance-avoidance (both choices are negative)
— approach-avoidance (there is a combination of positive and
    negative factors)
•   Dr. Hans Selye is a Canadian who is an expert on stress. He states that some
amount of stress is healthy; uncontrolled stress is not healthy.
•   A direct link between emotions and illness has been established.
•   Death is a natural part of our existence. Young children should be helped to
face death because eventually they will come in contact with it through the
death of pets, grandparents, or other family members.
•   Suicide is a particularly sensitive situation. For people contemplating suicide, a
strong network of support is comforting. Helping the bereaved deal with the
suicide of someone close takes special skills.
•   Defense mechanisms protect a person’s self-esteem When it comes under
threat.
•   There are many different kinds of defense mechanisms: repression,
suppression, compensation, overcompensation, sublimation, projection,
introjection, identification, reaction formation, procrastination, displaced
aggression, rationalization, and regression.
•   There are many useful tips to help us deal with stress and pressures. A person
must look after physical health, watch for ways to encourage mental health by
having a good attitude, and look for ways to introduce positive emotional
control.
•   Pets are very important for one’s physical and mental health.
•   In many special cases pets have shown they have tremendous therapeutic
value for the ill, the dependent, and the disturbed individual.
•   Touch is one of the very positive emotional connections we establish with
others.

186186
186186
1 8 6Section  Three:    Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
A
•   The general public perceives that violence and crime are escalating at
unbelievable rates. The truth is that some crime is gradually increasing, but
statistics indicate that fairly stable levels are shown for some offenses.
•   Victims of crimes face many physical injuries as well as a number of
psychological torments that range from feelings of violation to overwhelming
thoughts of fear and insecurity.
•   Unfortunately a large number of families experience violence in the home in
some form or another. Before marriage, people should take a close look for
signs of potential abuse in their mates.
•   The media reports many incidents of violence all the time. The violence a
person is exposed to on TV can have a tremendous impact on their attitudes
and behaviour regarding violence.
•   Many schools and communities have accepted a Zero Tolerance Policy for
acts of aggression and violence from young people.
•   The Young Offenders’ Act, passed in 1984, deals with young people between
12 and 18 years of age. It advocates shorter prison terms for youth crime,
and protects the identity of these young people.
•   Kleptomaniacs have an uncontrolled urge to steal items. Sometimes their
actions are based on sexual excitement; sometimes they are motivated by
revenge against authority figures.
•   Pyromania or the urge to set fires is caused by rebellion against authority,
destructive urges, and the quest for sexual excitement.
•   The psychopath may seem charming, yet here are some of their dangerous
qualities: habitual liars, self-centred, impulsive, and emotionally callous.
•   A psychopath is a person with no conscience (superego). Therefore they have
no moral principles in their relationships with others.
•   The psychopathic personality may develop due to poor socialization in early
childhood or alienation from close bonds with the parents. Some
psychologists believe that psychopaths are born, not raised to be that way.
•   Sexual assault is the sexual control and violation of someone against their will.
The rapist seeks to express anger, rage, and dominance.
•   Cults are groups that recruit and control people based on the perspective of
the cult which could be based on religion, politics, self discovery, or marketing
motives.
Turn to Assignment Booklet 5 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
187187
187187
187
Lesson 3: Neurosis
Overview
The term neurosis sounds mysterious and even exciting, but for people who are
affected by it, it is any thing but glamourous. Is there any justification for studying
bizarre mental conditions besides the fact that they are fascinating to research? Statistics
indicate that approximately 10% of the population suffer from some mental disorder
requiring professional treatment. One in ten young people are troubled by serious
emotional problems. Half of the routine medical cases treated by doctors are
compounded by a mental illness factor. Those facts alone are good reasons to study
neurosis.

188188
188188
1 8 8Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Lesson 3 will focus on these topics:
•   Beginning With Normal Behaviour
•   Mentally Challenged Versus Mentally Ill
•   The Pain of Labels
•   Neurosis: Excessive Anxiety
•   Causes of Neurosis
•   Amnesia and Dissociation
•   Conversion Hysteria
•   Psychosomatic Illness and Hypochondria
•   Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
•   Obsessive – Compulsive Behaviour
•   Anorexia Nervosa
•   Phobias
•   Depression
•   Brainwashing
Beginning  With  Normal  Behaviour
Which of these feelings have you experienced: unexplainable worry or anxiety about
the future; suspicions that people do not like you or are laughing at you; mood swings
from joy to depression? These reactions are pretty common, aren’t they? Occasionally
feeling worried, suspicious, or anxious about something is natural. But when these
feelings are exaggerated or persist over long periods of time, they may become
abnormal.
What distinguishes mental disturbance from normal behaviour? Let’s begin by
sketching a general outline of what is viewed as being normal. Normal people have
accepted the challenges of everyday life, meet conflicts as they arise, attack problems
realistically, and have a positive orientation to life. Normal people are able to adjust to
the problems and disruptions that come their way.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
189189
189189
189
Normal behaviour is behaviour which is typical of a group of people within the boundaries
of a culture. Each society determines the range of behaviour it considers normal. All
behaviour outside that range is labelled abnormal for that society. What is normal in one
society may be abnormal in others. Let’s use an example to illustrate this principle. For
example, some Native tribes celebrated the Potlatch when they got together for social
occasions. A rich chief would either give away or destroy many of his possessions. This
behaviour was considered normal for that Native society. If we suddenly started exhibiting
that kind of behaviour (destroying possessions or giving them away), people might wonder if
we were mentally stable. Thus we can see that normal behaviour is linked to what is
accepted as routine ways of acting for a certain society.
Mentally Challenged versus Mentally Ill
Before we begin our discussion of neurosis, let’s pause to make an important distinction.
The mentally challenged (at one time called mentally retarded) and the mentally ill are not the
same. Mentally challenged people have a physical impairment resulting from brain damage
or lack of brain development. The result is that intellectual capacity is below average.
Sometimes the damage occurs before birth due to chromosome deficiencies in the
developing baby. Sometimes the damage may occur during the birth process if the baby is
deprived of oxygen for too long at that time or if the baby receives an injury to the head
during a difficult birth. A person with Down’s Syndrome (having an extra chromosome in the
body) would be considered mentally challenged. Excellent progress is now being made with
mentally challenged people, but they cannot be cured in the sense that their intellectual
ability cannot be restored to full potential.

190190
190190
1 9 0Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Mental illness refers to having faulty reasoning about something. It means having unusual
misconceptions about life which are sometimes accompanied by strange behaviour. For
example, people with schizophrenia would be considered mentally ill because they
experience hallucinations, delusions, and mixed up thinking patterns. Many people with
mental illnesses find that therapy or drug treatment is helpful in controlling or reducing their
mental problems. Some mentally ill people are able to once again return to a normal lifestyle
as fully functioning members of society.
The  Pain  Of  Labels
Throughout this lesson and the following one, you will be learning about a number of
behavioural disorders. Some words of caution must be kept in mind before you begin.
The label of abnormal or sick can be very negative and should not be used in an
irresponsible way. If a person has a mental illness, the public reacts with fear, suspicion,
and even feelings of outright rejection.
The proper diagnosis of a mental condition requires a lengthy and precise assessment
from an extensively trained psychologist or therapist. When people have physical
illnesses, there is a great outpouring of sympathy and concern. But people are not
charitable with those feelings when it comes to mental illness. Even though mentally ill
people are not held legally responsible for their actions, the public perceives that they
are in some way to blame for becoming mentally ill.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
191191
191191
191
In general, mental illness is perceived to be a handicapped condition that has no sympathy.
Some people may reason that if there is no physical basis for mental illness, then people
become abnormal of their own free will. The public may falsely assume that mentally ill
people can snap out of their present condition with a little self-discipline.
With these public perceptions in mind, it is easy to see how labelling can be a dangerous
practice. We must be cautious. It is easy to carelessly attach a label to a person, but when a
label is applied it can be very difficult for that person to prove that they are once again
normal. Labelling is a value judgment which indicates that the person’s behaviour is
perceived to be inappropriate in some way and should be corrected.
Labels can represent serious handicaps. Use them with caution.
Neurosis:  Excessive  Anxiety
Neurosis is a psychological disorder characterized by anxiety, guilt, or depression.
Although an individual can be deeply upset by these factors, the person still has a clear idea
of reality and can function reasonably well in society.
There is not a great dividing line between being normal on one hand and being neurotic on
the other hand. Sometimes neurosis may develop from an extreme use of the normal
defense mechanisms. In general, the neurotic still has an understanding of reality, some
measure of judgment, a certain degree of social adjustment, and an awareness that he or she
is ill.
Neurosis is characterized by the fact that some function of the personality escapes
conscious control. Here are some other factors that will identify neurosis:
•   a loss of memory for a group of
ideas
•   an uncontrollable fear for which
no cause is apparent
•   a malfunctioning of a bodily
organ for which there seems to
be no physical cause
•   an odd behaviour pattern such
as a twitching muscle, a curious
movement of the hands or a
speech difficulty
neurosis – a
psychological
disorder
characterized  by
anxiety,  guilt  and
depression

192192
192192
1 9 2Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The most distinguishing characteristic of neurosis is excessive anxiety. The person is in a
state of continual fear that something terrible is about to happen. Let’s get a clear picture of
the difference between neurotic anxiety
and ordinary worry. For example, if there
is sickness in the home or when we are
uncertain of our financial security, we are
experiencing natural anxiety. However,
anxiety neurosis appears without any real
cause. It is often so intense that it can
only be described as panic. People with
anxiety neurosis may experience lingering
feelings of uneasiness. Sometimes their
feelings of dread become acute. Anxiety
arising from a repression of hostility or
sexual desires are common. The neurotic
person has the tendency to overreact to
many routine incidents which the average
person takes in stride.
Sometimes a neurotic person experiences intense fear which generalizes to include anxiety
about anything and everything. Anxiety may be free floating or not attached to any specific
object, event, or situation. The reason for the anxiety is often not readily observed or
known. If you experience a feeling of fear several times a day and in different situations
without knowing why, you have free floating anxiety.
Bound anxiety is associated with a specific object, event, or situation. For example, you
feel a great deal of fear whenever you are in a certain area of the neighbourhood and
you realize it is because there is a big dog in one of the back yards. You have a great
fear of dogs, and therefore you are experiencing bound anxiety. You realize the dog is
the reason for your experience of fear. When a person has free floating anxiety, the
vague nature of the anxiety is responsible for much of the terror experienced by the
patient. The person’s feelings are intense but he or she has no rational explanation to
account for them. One of the main functions of psychotherapy is to pinpoint the source
of anxiety in order to make it a manageable fear. If you put a name on the problem, then
you can do something about it because you understand the cause.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
193193
193193
193
Besides anxiety, what are some of the other symptoms of neurosis? Most neurotic
individuals feel inadequate, tense, irritable, and dissatisfied with life. They are rigid and
guarded in their thinking and are unable to withstand much stress without becoming
emotionally disturbed. Individuals suffering from anxiety reactions may voice
complaints in terms of such feelings as confusion, restlessness, sluggish thinking, dread
of impending illness, or fear of indescribable danger. The physical signs of fear are
often present including rapid heartbeat, difficulty in swallowing or breathing,
perspiration, tenseness, nausea, exhaustion, dizzy spells, cold sweats, headaches,
stomach pains, dry mouth, and cold, moist hands and feet. The patient may also
complain of insomnia, loss of appetite, and the inability to work.
Because neurotic people believe there is so much anxiety in their lives, they tend to use
the defense mechanism repression to hide ideas they find unpleasant. Another reason
feelings of anxiety are repressed or denied is because of guilt associated with the event
or because there is emotional pain when recalling it. When an idea or feeling is
repressed, the purpose is to reduce anxiety by denying the existence of that threatening
idea. When people use repression too frequently, their contacts with the real world
become limited. In psychotherapy, the original source of anxiety must be openly
identified so it may be dealt with by the individual. Neurotic people use so much
energy keeping repressed anxiety under control that they do not have very much energy
left over for pleasurable and productive activities.
Causes  Of  Neurosis
Neurotic behaviour is generally believed to be based on faulty emotional habits and
attitudes. Neurotic disturbances usually stem from irrational thoughts rather than
physical defects. However, physical factors may also contribute to the development of
neurosis in a small number of cases. Neurotic patterns may develop if some of the
glands do not function properly, especially the thyroid gland.
The following factors appear to form a common thread in the development of many
neurotic conditions:
•   Emotional disturbances were frequently recorded in members of the neurotic’s
family.
•   As a child, the neurotic may have experienced trauma, sexual repression, and
ostracism (or rejection by others).
•   During childhood there were above average demands on the neurotic to “be
good”.

194194
194194
1 9 4Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Today greater emphasis is being placed on the early detection and prevention of
behaviour disorders. People tend to seek treatment when their abnormal behaviour
hampers their ability to function. A decision regarding active treatment is usually made
with these factors in mind:
•   persistence of the problem
•   degree of interference the problem causes with one’s everyday life
•   importance of the problem in the eyes of the individual and those close to the person
A common mechanism used by neurotics to control anxiety is to avoid any direct
confrontation with the source of anxiety. Thus one of the goals of therapy is for neurotic
people to remodel their self-concept and to see themselves as someone who can meet
anxiety-producing situations and retain control. Another rehabilitative technique for the
neurotic is learning to express hostility in adequate ways which builds a healthy, integrated
personality.
Amnesia And Dissociation
Certain actions, feelings and thoughts usually
occur together as a group of related activities.
Dissociation causes a disruption or split in a
person’s integrated, consistent concept of
themselves from day to day. Dissociation is a
behaviour disorder in which the main part of the
individual’s personality is in conflict with other
activities the person may be tempted to do. For
example, Sue perceives herself to be a loving,
caring kind of person. Dissociation causes her to
frequently become abrupt with her associates and
suddenly she decides to cheat on her steady
boyfriend. Stress can cause dissociation to take
place. Amnesia or memory loss is a kind of
dissociative reaction.
Amnesia means that all or major parts of the memory are “forgotten”. When amnesia
occurs personal memories and personal identity is repressed or forgotten by the individual.
By contrast, the person still retains general knowledge, habits, special talents, and overall
information about how to function in society. For example, an amnesia patient may not
remember their own name, address, or information about their family and friends (personal
knowledge). They will likely know how to operate a car, how to eat with a knife and fork,
or how to sing or play the piano (general knowledge). Personal memories may be painful for
the person so these memories are temporarily forgotten. General knowledge is emotionally
nonthreatening, so those memories are retained.
dissociation – a
neurotic  reaction
to extreme stress
which  disrupts  the
normal
association  of
thoughts,
memories, and
behaviour

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
195195
195195
195
Fugue amnesia (from the Latin word “to flee”) is the most extreme type of amnesia. It
describes a situation whereby the person loses his/her memory and runs away or escapes to
a strange environment. A young woman in Alberta experienced fugue amnesia. She lost
knowledge of her personal memories, hitchhiked to California, and was found wandering
and disoriented. She was brought home by family members, but even in a familiar
environment, she struggled to remember the details of her life prior to her attack of amnesia.
Memory may be restored after a bout of amnesia by using therapy to treat the repression.
Sometimes memory will return after a highly emotional experience. Recovering memory is
one of the primary goals when treating a person for amnesia. Another important objective is
healing the conflicts that caused the amnesia attack in the first place.
Another interesting phenomenon related to dissociation is sleep disorders. Somnambulism
is sleep walking. Sleep problems are not related to mental illness. They occur due to
neurological or physiological disruptions that upset the normal behaviour of the brain during
sleep. You may recall from the section on sleep earlier in this course, mention was made of
REM which means rapid eye movements which are present during the deeper stages of
sleep. Usually sleep walking occurs during the non-REM stages of sleep.
During REM sleep or dream sleep, the motor
functions of the body are prevented from engaging
in any activity. So you may dream that you are
running across a field but your body remains
motionless. When an REM sleep disorder occurs,
people can become mobile while they are dreaming
because the mechanism that usually prevents this
from happening has been blocked. Sometimes the
actions that the dreamer is engaged in have a very
violent nature. In a few cases people have
committed murder in their sleep or have caused
serious injury to others—sometimes their own loved
ones! This phenomenon is called non-insane
automatism because it is a behaviour that the
person is not aware of. In fact, these people are
usually horrified when told of the violent things they
have done. One of the treatments for severe sleep
walking disorders is medication such as
tranquillizers or antiseizure drugs. Usually men
commit violent sleep-related crimes more often than women.
fugue – amnesia
involving  running
away from one’s
familiar
surroundings
somnambulism –
a sleep walking
disturbance
non-insane
automatism –
being unaware of
committing a
violent  act  during
sleep

196196
196196
1 9 6Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Conversion  Hysteria
Sometimes a repressed emotion becomes converted into a physical symptom in order to
relieve the emotional strain. When conversion hysteria occurs, there is no actual biological
or organic changes to the body but the individual experiences problems with sensory or
motor functioning. Freud’s theory on conversion hysteria was that the energy behind the
repressed emotion becomes channelled into a physical reaction which eventually blocks and
disturbs the smooth functioning of the organ it is affecting.
Psychological distress is converted to physical distress. For example, you have to sing
in front of a large crowd of people. You are so afraid that you lose your voice
completely. You do not have laryngitis; you lose your voice due to extreme fear.
Distress is shown by adopting the role of a person with an actual pathologic illness.
Getting sick or developing a physical symptom is the way a person chooses to escape
from a dangerous psychological situation. Illness provides immunity and protection
from threatening situations because heavy demands are not made on sick people. Extra
attention and sympathy are extended to the sick. Therefore, the individual capitalizes on
conversion hysteria for these benefits as well.
Here are a few types of conversion hysteria:
paralysis.... any part of the body may be affected
anaesthesia.... a total loss of sensation
paraesthesia.... unusual reactions like tingling sensations or distorted
vision
glove/stocking anaesthesia.... loss of sensation in the areas covered by these garments
mutism.... inability to speak
aphonia ....inability to speak above a whisper
tremors and tics .... spasmodic movements in small groups of muscles
hysterical fit.... similar in outward symptoms to an epileptic seizure
hysterical twilight states.... feelings of haziness, disorientation; experiences are
distorted and dreamlike
People with conversion hysteria are usually quite indifferent to the ailments they have.
Their physical illnesses give them a legitimate excuse to avoid fearful situations. Even
when people attempt to treat their conversion hysteria, symptoms will reappear and
persist until the underlying conflict is dealt with and resolved. Dealing with the root
cause or conflict is the key to curing conversion hysteria.
conversion
hysteria –
physical
symptoms develop
when  energy
behind  a
repressed emotion
upsets the smooth
functioning  of  a
body  organ

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
197197
197197
197
Psychosomatic  Disorders  And  Hypochondria
Psychosomatic disorders were discussed earlier in the course. They have a relationship to
the topic of neurosis as well. Because the mind and body interact, what is happening in the
mind can also have an effect on the body. Physical illness may be caused by prolonged
mental stress leading to psychosomatic illness. Psycho means mind and soma means body.
Emotional factors produce the ailments which often include actual damage to body tissue.
Treatment that helps relieve emotional tensions also helps to relieve organic damage. The
reverse is also true. It has been estimated that approximately half of all patients under a
physician’s care have illnesses arising from emotional stress or psychosomatic illness.
A hypochondriac is a person who is preoccupied with
bodily ailments and who exaggerates every minor
symptom or mild discomfort. Hypochondria is different
from psychosomatic illness. Psychosomatic illness is
actual physical illness which is the outcome of prolonged
periods of emotional stress. The person with
hypochondria worries that something is wrong with his
or her body when there is nothing wrong. For example,
hypochondriacs often read about a new illness and
decide they have that illness (when they don’t).
The hypochondriac is often said to enjoy poor health. The illnesses bring sympathy and
attention from others. Illness also gives the individual a convenient excuse not to participate
in a variety of activities. In this way illness gives the hypochondriac a form of security against
the possible risk of failure.
Chronic  Fatigue  Syndrome
In the last few years there seems to be a steep increase in the reported cases of Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome. It is a condition which is misunderstood by the medical community and
the general public alike. Many sufferers are not given a lot of sympathy because many
people perceive that it is an attention seeking device and the lazy person’s way of avoiding a
lot of responsibility. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) affects about 2% of the population,
so it is not a rare illness. About 70% of the people afflicted are women. There are many
different symptoms associated with the illness such as debilitating fatigue which lasts for 6
months or longer, immune defects, sleep disturbances, low-grade fever, painful lymph
nodes, sore throat, chills, headaches, muscle pain and muscle weakness, depression, and
inability to perform daily activities.
hypochondriac –
a person who
worries about a
number of
illnesses  when
there  is  nothing
wrong

198198
198198
1 9 8Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Only recently have doctors been able to diagnose
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. There are a variety of
theories about the cause. Brain scans reveal
differences between normal individuals and those
with CFS. There are patterns of decreased blood
flow in the limbic regions of the brain deep in the
temporal lobes. Further evidence shows low levels
of cortisol, a stress hormone, in the blood of CFS
patients. Some viruses which have not yet be
pinpointed could trigger the onset of the disease.
There are clear immune system differences between
CFS patients and healthy people.
At one time bed rest was the prescribed treatment
for CFS. Nowadays, patients are urged to
participate in light exercise, take some
antidepressants, and follow a healthy diet with herbs
and vitamins. Counselling is also available to CFS
patients to overcome depression. There is no cure
for CFS; it can last for years.
Even though Chronic Fatigue Syndrome is a physically-based illness, it is included in the
lesson on neurosis because like neurotic conditions it affects the everyday behaviour of the
people who have it.
Obsessive  –  Compulsive  Behaviour
The combination of obsessive-compulsive neurotic behaviours may involve: obsessive
thoughts, compulsive acts, or a combination of obsessive thoughts with compulsive acts.
Let’s look at each part of the obsessive-compulsive condition in turn.
Obsessions are simply persistent, irrational thoughts. The appearance of inappropriate
thoughts occur and will not leave the mind voluntarily. For example, you may believe that if
you do not attend every game that your high school basketball team plays, they will lose.
Then you will blame yourself for causing them to lose these games. That’s a strange idea,
isn’t it? But that’s the kind of weird logic that surrounds obsessions. Obsessions are ideas
heavily laden with strong emotions. A person may perceive obsessions to be dangerous
because they violate the individual’s personal goals and values.
The disruptions and annoyance that obsessions bring to the individual can cause a person to
feel constrained and disorganized. For example, an obsession might be a certain tune that
persists in one’s imagination or it may be a continually recurring conviction that one did not
turn off the stove. Obsessions are so insistent and recurrent that they limit a person’s actions
obsessions –
persistent,
irrational
thoughts  that
repeatedly  run
through  the
person’s mind

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
199199
199199
199
by distracting the mind and draining all of the person’s energies in order to ensure their
control. These people spend so much time keeping their anxiety under control that they are
prevented from accomplishing something useful in their lives. For example, a person may
fear speaking out in public or doing something to embarrass themselves so they monitor
their behaviour with rigid strictness. The person who has obsessive behaviour may be
someone who is an extreme worrier. Obsessions focus on such topics as personal insecurity,
perfection, sex, aggression, guilt, love, and hate. For example, a person might harbour
obsessive fears of dirt and germs, of being poisoned or attacked, and fears of doing harm to
someone.
A compulsion is an action that results from an
irresistible inner force compelling the performance
of an act without, or even against the will of the
individual. For example, handwashing is one of the
most common of the compulsive acts. Most
compulsions reveal a profound concern for
cleanliness and order. It is as though the victim
were trying in this way to wash out some guilty
memory of past uncleanliness or misbehaviour.
Compulsive behaviour is never altered in any
detail; it is repetitive, ritualistic actions. Some
compulsive behaviours might be an urge to count
and then to recount something, persistent
mannerisms (tics), and compulsive sexual
behaviour.
To review: obsessions are persistent thoughts compulsions are repetitive actions
A combination of obsessive-compulsive behaviour also exists. For example, a person is
plagued with constant anxiety about disease germs (obsession) and handles such fear with
excessive handwashing (compulsion). Superstitions are fascinating examples of obsessive-
compulsive actions. A superstition might demand some action. For example, you believe that
spilling salt is bad luck (obsession), so whenever that happens you have to throw some salt
over your shoulder to cancel the bad luck (compulsion). You might assess one of your own
pet superstitions in light of the information given.
Obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD) are caused by a chemical imbalance. OCD usually
starts in adolescence. People affected realize there is something wrong with them. These
people are intelligent and perform their everyday tasks. At the same time, they carefully
conceal their secret disturbance from others. OCD tends to show up in other family
members. There is no cure for OCD but it can be effectively controlled with drugs or
therapy which helps the individual to get the upper hand on this behaviour. OCD may affect
as many as 3% of the population.
compulsions –
actions  that  result
from a strong,
persistent urge to
engage in a
particular
behaviour

200200
200200
2 0 0Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
An unusual compulsive behaviour is hair pulling know as trichotillomania. Hair
pulling is caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain and medication can correct it
although there is no known cure.
Related to compulsive disorders is the condition known as Tourette’s Syndrome. It is a
condition which includes many different motor tics (related to body movement) and vocal
tics. Motor tics include such things as eye blinking, mouth opening, grimacing, or shoulder
shrugging. Vocal tics include such things as throat clearing, snorting, grunting, or barking. An
individual may repeat sounds or words. In some cases, an individual may involuntarily use
foul language (swearing), or may involuntarily make obscene gestures.
An individual experiencing Tourette’s Syndrome may have tics many times a day. The
location of the tics on the body and their frequency can change over time. The disorder
usually begins sometime during childhood and affects more males than females.
Research is still not clear about causes but neurotransmitters in the brain are involved in
some way. A variety of drugs may be used to keep the tics under control so they no
longer interfere with the individual’s daily life. Self-control is difficult for people with
Tourette’s Syndrome because it is a complex neurochemical problem. The person with
Tourette’s should not feel cornered either physically or emotionally. The goal of any
treatment or therapy is not to eliminate the tics but to bring them under some measure of
control.
Anorexia  Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is an extreme loss of appetite over a long period of time for
emotional reasons. The individual finds it impossible to consume food. In some cases
even actual threat of death by starvation will not sway a person from their refusal to eat.
Anorexia nervosa occurs in women more often than in men in a ratio of nine to one.
One usual reason behind the disorder is fear of sexual maturity, thus the patient attempts
to remain excessively thin and underdeveloped. Another reason for anorexia is that
food may be associated with impregnation because the body expands with healthy
eating habits as it does with pregnancy. Anorexia nervosa may by motivated by
retaliation. Because parents often express worry over the child’s proper eating habits,
rejection of food becomes an ideal method the child uses to exert control in their lives.
The anorexic seeks precise control over his or her body and body functions, and uses
food as a means of reaching that goal. Some of the side effects of anorexia are hair loss,
tooth and nail decay (from lack of nutrition), and a feeling of body coldness all the time.
Anorexia commonly begins between the ages of 14 to 25 years. About one-third of the
people who have this condition will recover fully. Times of high stress may cause a
person to relapse during treatment. About 15 to 20 % will find the condition fatal due to
medical complications and some will commit suicide.
Tourette’s
Syndrome – a
compulsive
disorder  involving
many  different
motor tics and
vocal  tics
anorexia nervosa
– a severe eating
disorder
characterized  by
a refusal to eat
which results in
the  person
becoming
extremely thin

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
201201
201201
201
Bulimia is an eating disorder related to anorexia,
but quite different as well. The bulimic goes on an
eating binge, consuming vast quantities of food and
then attempts to get rid of the food by self-induced
vomiting, by excessive use of laxatives, by periods
of fasting, or by excessive exercising. So the
procedures are different between bulimia and
anorexia, but the underlying reasons are similar: an
obsessive concern with body weight and body
image, an abnormal fear of fatness, and an intense
desire for control in one’s life. Often the person’s
dentist can see the telltale signs of bulimia by the
condition of the patient’s teeth from constant
vomiting. Some of the medical effects of self-
starvation include dry skin, reduced energy, loss of
menstruation, low body temperature, low heart rate,
low blood pressure, and hair growth that is slow.
When either bulimia or anorexia continues for many years, serious damage is done to the
body which needs basic nutrition to grow and function normally. The person afflicted with
eating disorders has a very distorted self-perception. They look into the mirror and see
someone they consider fat and ugly even though they may weigh less than 100 pounds.
Bulimia and anorexia are extreme forms of dieting where people risk their health and their
lives to attain a thin body image.
Phobias
Phobias are excessive, irrational fears that go far beyond natural fear and occur in the
absence of real danger. Phobias are often successfully hidden from the attention of medical
personnel and casual acquaintances. Many individuals accept their phobias as an inevitable
part of their lives. They quietly plan self-imposed limitations on their daily lives to control
their phobias without bringing attention to their problems. Repression causes the victims to
be unaware of the source of underlying hostilities related to their particular phobia.
An entirely normal apprehension or fear could get out of hand and escalate until it becomes
a phobia which controls your life. For example, a healthy respect for elevator safety keeps
you alive; a phobic fear that prevents you from getting into an elevator can be a serious
disadvantage if you live in or work in a high-rise building. No phobia should be taken lightly.
In extreme cases, acute fear or panic can do severe damage. In many cases, extreme fear in
the form of a phobia produces physical symptoms and feelings of uncontrollable terror.
bulimia –an
eating  disorder
marked by eating
binges
alternating  with
purging  (or
getting  rid  of
consumed  food
through  vomiting
laxatives  or
excessive
exercising)
phobia – an
excessive,
irrational  fear  of
some object or
situation  that
occurs in the
absence of any
danger

202202
202202
2 0 2Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
The boundaries of a phobia vary. In some cases a phobia is confined to a specific
object or event. However, sometimes the phobic problem worsens as the number of
phobias spread and grow to include other objects and situations. There are some signs
that some people are continually fear-prone so if one phobia problem is removed, the
victim may quickly acquire another. In theory, a person could go through life developing
one phobia after another if proper treatment is not undertaken. Here is a small list
of phobias:
claustrophobia............................enclosed spaces
acrophobia............................heights
lyssophobia............................becoming insane
necrophobia............................death
agoraphobia............................open places (“housewives” disease)
xenophobia............................strangers
zoophobia............................ animals
toxophobia............................poisoning
ochlophobia............................crowds
hydrophobia............................ water
nyctophobia............................darkness
heliophobia............................sunlight
phengophobia............................daylight
astraphobia............................thunderstorms
hematophobia............................blood
pathophobia............................disease
ophidiophobia............................snakes
monophobia............................ being alone
pyrophobia............................fire
domatophobia............................being in a house
cardiophobia............................heart disease
gatophobia............................ cats
arachnophobia............................spiders
erythrophobia............................the colour red
agyiophobia............................ streets
orniphobia............................ birds
What are some of the reasons people develop such strong and such weird phobias?
The conditioning theory explains it this way. First, an emotionally traumatic
experience occurs. That may trigger feelings of guilt which the person attempts to
repress or push from their mind. Therefore, unusual fears are commonly traceable
to early experiences in which these situations possessed a terrifying hold on the
person.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
203203
203203
203
A second theory known as the dynamic theory explains phobias in a slightly
different way. Impulses that we are not aware of (unconscious) generate an
emotional response. The person will not allow the impulse to be expressed, but the
underlying emotion still remains. Emotional anxiety eventually builds up and the
person uses a phobia as a defense mechanism for protection. The person
unconsciously chooses an object and believes that object is the source of anxiety.
The person has attached a definite (although not necessarily accurate) label to his or
her fears and maintains control of anxiety by the avoiding the phobic object or
situation. The object identified as the phobic one may be purely symbolic, or it may
have a genuinely close connection to the underlying conflict or perceived danger
experienced by the individual.
But perhaps more important than the theory behind the phobia is the concern about
how the phobia can be effectively treated. As one person said, “Does it matter how you
lost your left foot in an accident? The most important thing is how do you teach a
person to function effectively without the use of one of their feet.” The same is true for
a phobia. What sorts of therapies bring the best
results?
One of the most gentle ways of treating a phobia
is through desensitization. First, the phobic
patient is asked to relax. Then, the patient is led
through a hierarchy of fear—he or she is asked
to imagine a mild fear in relation to the phobia.
The patient gradually imagines successive
scenes that are more directly involved with the
source of fear and therefore are more terrifying.
For example, if you have a phobia about birds.
The therapists using desensitization would ask
you to look at pictures of birds, then be in a
room with stuffed birds, then be a block away
from a live bird, and eventually get very close to
a real bird. Patients lose their fear in small steps.
Flooding means that the patient is confronted
with the full phobic reaction right in the
beginning by being exposed to the full emotional experience all in one step. So, the
flooding method of phobia therapy exposes a patient to the exact object of fear at the
start of the treatment. For example, if you have a bird phobia, a live bird would be
placed close by you in the initial treatment session. You would have to adapt to your
fears and conquer them immediately.
desensitization –
a method of
reducing fears by
gradually
introducing  the
person to
situations  or
objects  connected
with their fears
flooding – a
method  of
treating fears by
forcing  the  person
to  immediately
confront  their
fears

204204
204204
2 0 4Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Depression
Unlike some of the other neurotic behaviours, depression is part of our everyday
vocabulary. Some people use it casually to mean they are temporarily “down in the dumps”.
But depression is also related to much more serious emotional concerns. What is
depression? Depression is a debilitating mood that lasts for several weeks or longer. It
interferes with our work, our relationships, our social life, and our sense of personal worth.
It is characterized by pessimism that interferes with the way a person needs to function in
his/her everyday life. Some of the more specific symptoms include:
•   irritability or sadness
•   inexplicable fatigue
•   aches and pains
•   loss of appetite, digestion problems, constipation
•   bouts of crying
•   lack of sexual interest
•   sleep disturbances
•   feelings of anxiety, guilt, and worthlessness
•   inability to concentrate or make decisions
•   restlessness or lethargy
•   thoughts of suicide
A combination of social/emotional factors along
with genetic variables is thought to be the cause of
depression. Unpleasant, stressful situations in
one’s life can trigger depression like loss of a job,
serious financial difficulties, termination of a
marriage or long term relationship, the onset of a
serious illness, or the death of someone very
close. A person’s life history is another factor to
consider. As a child, the person may have been
subjected to many traumas. A person may have
endured physical or sexual abuse. Yet it is
interesting to note that many people who have
experienced the horrors of being raised in a war-
torn country do not develop depression.
depression – a
lingering  mood  of
sadness,
pessimism,
hopelessness,
anxiety; a deep
gloom  which
causes a disrup-
tion in mental and
physical  activities

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
205205
205205
205
An imbalance in one’s brain chemistry is another possible cause of depression
according to recent research. A deficiency of serotonin can cause alteration of moods
and the growth of negative thoughts and emotions. Physicians treating their depressed
patients with antidepressants note that when the chemical imbalance is treated, the
depression goes away. Then comes the question: does depression alter the brain
chemistry or does the imbalance in brain chemistry lead to the depression? Which one
comes first? Another interesting question is: if depression is strictly due to a chemical
imbalance, then why are the number of depressed people increasing dramatically over
the past few decades? Perhaps depression is linked to increasing social problems in our
society.
Approximately 3 million Canadians are afflicted with clinical depression. Unfortunately
only about one-third of these people will seek help of any kind. Depression commonly
strikes the age group between 24 to 44 years of age. Women are thought to experience
depression more than men but perhaps women tend to reach out to others and seek help
more than men do, so that perception may not be entirely true. People tend to link
depression to feelings of sadness. That emotion is likely most prevalent for depressed
women. But depression has also been associated with feelings of hostility and
aggression which are more often shown by men when they feel depressed. One cannot
assume that men and women are the same when it comes to depression. There is a
strong link between female hormones and moods, so this is one obvious difference.
If depression is untreated, there is always the possibility
of a suicide risk. But even mild depression can ebb
away at a person’s creative energy, so treatment is
definitely recommended rather than simply letting the
person come out of the depression by themselves.
Approach a depressed acquaintance in the same way
you would someone with a physical illness and give
them support. Listen if the person wants to talk out
some of their problems. Help with daily chores if that is
possible. Join the person for little social outings like a
walk, coffee, or going to a movie. People withdraw
from others when they are depressed, but this is the time
when they need outside contacts the most. To be
mentally healthy, people need strong connections to
meaningful employment, their communities, and of
course their families.
If you are the depressed person, ask your family doctor for a referral to a counsellor,
psychologist, or therapist. Sometimes a local distress line or crisis line may give you a
place to start. Don’t let depression go untreated.

206206
206206
2 0 6Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Brainwashing
The human mind is a complex and fascinating processor and creator of ideas. The way a
person’s mind functions is unique and has a direct impact on who we are—our personality.
For these reasons, the progressive societies of the world find the idea of forcibly controlling
someone else’s mind a very abhorrent, unethical idea. This position about mind control was
not always endorsed, even in our own society. Certainly during wartime, these high ideals
denouncing the use of mind control were certainly not followed.
For example, during the Korean War in the early 1950’s communist powers were using
brainwashing or mind control as a weapon against captured prisoners. The idea was to
destroy the individual’s personality and beliefs and then reprogram or implant new
ideas that were in line with the “enemy’s beliefs”. It is a very vicious way of
influencing the person and causing them to abandon the philosophy of life that they
voluntarily chose as they became adults.
The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) under the American government decided that
they should experiment and collect data about brainwashing so that they too could use
this means of control. They asked a psychologist at a Montreal institute if he would
collect information on mind control that would be useful to them. Canadians who came
to the clinic for help with their psychological problems were used in the mind control
experiments without their consent or their knowledge that this was actually happening
to them.
What sorts of maltreatment did these mentally ill patients suffer? The first step was to
depattern or rather destroy the person’s original personality. Then the patients would be
vulnerable to new ideas and beliefs that would later be implanted. Erasing the patients’
original ideas was accomplished by forcing them to live under strict environmental
control. Some were given the hallucinogenic drug, LSD. Some were controlled by
forcing them to sleep for long periods of time—even days by administering drugs or
using insulin injections to create a coma. High-voltage shock therapy was another
method applied to control and alter the personalities of depressed patients. Another
technique that was used to subdue patients was something called psychic driving which
means that the person had to listen to tape recordings with repetitive messages until it
wore them down. In some cases a combination of these treatments were applied.
Were the brainwashing experiments successful in accomplishing the task of controlling
the minds’ of the people unfortunate enough to become patients or rather victims of
such treatment? Most people in the program experienced permanent harm from the
unethical methods used against them to alter their personalities and beliefs. Some lost
many of their early memories of their lives; many experienced lasting nightmares from
the treatment they received at the Montreal clinic which attempted to brainwash them.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
207207
207207
207
These people and their families have sought justice by bringing lawsuits against the
CIA for initiating such a destructive program. The patients have received payment but
that does not compensate for the terrible damage that has been done to their minds and
to their self-concepts.
Summary
This lesson gave you the opportunity to study some of the unusual neurotic behaviours
people develop when plagued by guilt, anxiety, and stress. Neurosis interferes with a
person’s everyday functioning, but it is usually not serious enough to completely destroy the
person’s sense of self and their ability to cope with life. Neurosis takes many shapes and
forms. Let’s review what you have learned in this lesson.
To summarize:
•   Each culture’s definition of normal behaviour is different.
•   Being normal means adjusting to the demands and expectations of your own
culture whatever they may be.
•   Mentally challenged people are those whose mental development has been
hampered by birth defects or injuries of some kind.
•   Mental illness refers to problems with one’s perceptions of life and one’s
behaviour patterns.
•   Although we may be tempted to diagnose someone else’s behaviour and
attach a label to it, we must remember that labels can impose a very
negative value judgement.
•   One of the chief characteristics of people with neurosis is the excessive
anxiety they feel.
•   Free floating anxiety means that the person has a general feeling of worry
or uneasiness that is not connected to any specific object, event, or
situation.
•   Bound anxiety is linked to a specific cause—an object, event, or situation.
•   Neurotic individuals feel irritable, tense, and dissatisfied with life.
•   Amnesia means that people forget important memories from their past
through repression and dissociation or disconnecting key links between
activities and behaviour.
•   Sleep disturbances are another type of dissociation; sometimes sleep
walking disorders can be violent in nature.

208208
208208
2 0 8Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
•   Conversion hysteria occurs when strong, repressed emotions disturb the
smooth functioning of some body organ.
•   The hypochondriac continually worries about many body ailments just for
the sake of getting sympathy and attention.
•   Chronic Fatigue Syndrome prevents people from performing everyday
functions when they are overcome by such symptoms as: an
overwhelming sense of fatigue, headaches, muscle pain, fever, and
depression.
•   Obsessive behaviours are persistent thoughts that grip the mind.
•   Compulsive behaviours are repetitive, ritualistic actions.
•   Obsessive-compulsive behaviours are a combination of rigid ideas and
controlling behaviours.
•   Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder whereby the young person stops
eating until they become thin almost to the point of starvation.
•   Bulimia is an eating disorder characterized by periods of binge (nonstop)
eating and then purging to get rid of the food that has been consumed.
•   Phobias are types of intense, panic fear reactions; a person will go to any
lengths to avoid the specific object or event that creates a phobia.
•   Desensitization is a method of treating fears or phobias by having a person
gradually confront the object that is feared using small steps with more
and more frightening situations.
•   Flooding is a method of treating fears or phobias by immediately
confronting the feared object right from the beginning.
•   Depression is a serious physical/emotional state that causes a person to be
unable to function when fulfilling everyday duties.
•   A depressed person will display some of the following characteristics:
feelings of worthlessness and sadness, problems with sleeping,
restlessness, fatigue, digestive problems, body pains, and inability to
concentrate on tasks.
•   Brainwashing means forcibly controlling a person’s mind by destroying
their personality and beliefs and then programming them with new ideas.
Turn to Assignment Booklet 6 and complete the assignments for this lesson.
A

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
209209
209209
209
Lesson 4: Psychosis
Overview
In Lesson 3 you examined some of the less severe social and personality disturbances
known as neurosis. Psychosis is even more of a challenge to treat, and if possible, to
control. What is psychosis? How does it compare with neurosis? How does a person
become psychotic? Psychosis sounds very dangerous and threatening. Are there any
dangers involved with these illnesses? The topic of psychosis raises a number of
concerns that you will examine in this lesson.

210210
210210
2 1 0Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Lesson 4 will focus on these topics:
•   Defining Psychosis
•   Misconceptions About Psychosis
•   Panic Attacks
•   Paranoia
•   Manic-Depression
•   Schizophrenia
•   Self-injurious Behaviour
•   Organic Psychosis
•   Alzheimer’s Disease
•   Treatments: What Is Working and What Is Not Working
•   Multiple Personality
Defining  Psychosis
Psychosis can he described as a serious pathological (abnormal) state resulting in a loss of
contact with reality. A person who suffers from such a severe mental illness is called
psychotic. Psychotics experience periods of time when they are unable to make adequate
distinctions between what is real and what is not. They may develop distorted
interpretations of events. Thought patterns and emotions are abnormal which interferes with
their daily functioning. Psychotics will rarely admit that their actions are abnormal or unusual.
Because they are out of touch with reality, psychotics are unaware of the extent of their
mental disorders and are therefore not alarmed by their conditions.
How can we distinguish psychosis from neurosis? Let’s summarize the distinctive
characteristics of each one on a chart.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
211211
211211
211
•   only a segment of the personality is
involved
•   emotional problems are the key
•   does not involve a severe
deterioration in intellectual capacity
•   emotional disturbances only affect a
limited range of experiences
•   day-to-day life continues
•   the entire personality is affected
•   results from a malfunctioning of the
brain
•   intellectual ability may be hampered
•   dramatic mood disturbances affect all
aspects of daily routines
•   cannot function adequately in
ordinary society
Neurosis
Psychosis
What are some of the general characteristics of a psychotic person? Please remember that
only someone with expert training in psychology can give a professional diagnosis. Here are
some relevant points:
•   lack of contact with reality
•   extreme depression or excitement
•   partial or complete withdrawal from social contacts with others
•   confused ideas about people or objects
•   hallucinations and/or delusions
•   in a minority of cases there may be hostility
What might cause people to become psychotic? There are two very different opinions
on this question. First, a predisposition to some types of psychoses (plural of
psychosis) may be inherited. That means a person has a “tendency” to have a certain
condition, and if the right circumstances prevail, the illness will develop. It is yet
unclear how strong the hereditary factor may be. Body chemistry (e.g. blood and urine
samples) differ between the normal individual and the psychotic. Body chemistry also
shows a variation between one psychotic and another depending on the particular
disorder.
A second group of factors instrumental in the formation of psychotic conditions are
environmental and social factors. Many people with mental illnesses come from very
abusive home backgrounds. Chronic stress and conflicts in the child’s life, if severe
enough, could lead to one or another form of psychosis.
predisposition –
the “built in”
tendency  to
develop  a
particular
behaviour

212212
212212
2 1 2Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Misconceptions About Psychosis
In earlier times, psychosis was associated with sin and evil spirits. The general public still
have lingering false ideas about psychosis. Many people are uninformed enough to consider
it a disgrace if anyone in the family has any history of mental illness. If someone we know
has a serious physical illness like heart disease or cancer, we don’t say that condition is
disgraceful.
The person suffering from psychosis requires just as much care and understanding as
the one with a physical illness. Punishment or rejection will not help.
In Lesson 3 you learned how hurtful it is to carelessly apply labels to a person suffering
from neurosis. Labelling someone psychotic can be even more upsetting. People who are
labelled psychotic are treated as psychotic and thus continue to respond in psychotic ways.
Therefore if the person is mislabelled psychotic, the results can be very damaging.
A stigma is a label associated with disgrace, dishonour, or
shame. For example, if someone serves time in jail, that is
considered a stigma. The stigma or sense of shame may also
spread to the person’s family. For example, the parents are
out of work, so the family is poor. Therefore, they require
social assistance. That would be considered a stigma as
well. Everyone in the family falls into the same negative
category. Sometimes the stigma or mark of disgrace is
justified because the person is truly evil or dangerous.
Sometimes the person is saddled with a negative label they
don’t deserve.
From what has been said about society’s opinions about psychosis, we conclude that
psychological disturbances come under the cloud of being a stigma. Because the
misconception still exists that psychotics are evil and therefore deserve their situation, there
is a tendency to punish those individuals more severely. The punisher doesn’t sympathize or
identify with the psychotic person. Another misconception is that the psychotic person is
dangerous. A few psychotics must be guarded carefully, but many of the rest are nonviolent
and calm. Most psychotics are more of a danger to themselves than they are to anyone else.
Can some of the severe forms of psychosis be cured? Perhaps many of them cannot be
cured in the strictest sense, but they can be controlled with proper medication, counselling,
and therapy. Approximately 70 to 80% of all mental patients can be released from
institutions and satisfactorily adjust to normal life. However, their treatment must be
monitored to ensure their progress toward mental health continues.
Now that we have identified psychosis in very general terms, let’s go on to study some
of the specific forms of psychosis.
stigma – a label
of disgrace or
dishonour

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
213213
213213
213
Panic Attacks
Panic attack victims are not truly psychotic. However, panic attacks are included in the
lesson on psychosis because they are an intense, crippling emotional experience that
deeply alters the lives of the people affected. Panic attacks can prevent people from
coping with life; they destroy people’s daily routines. In between attacks, people lead a
somewhat normal life, but they are always in a state of anxiety not knowing when it
may strike again.
What are panic attacks? In Lesson 3 (Neurosis) you learned about excessive anxiety
and how that can cause problems for those who experience it. Panic attacks are more
serious than just a case of “bad nerves” or mild distress. People who suffer from panic
attacks stress the terrible out-of-control feelings that overtake them. When a full-fledged
panic attack occurs, the victims often mistake their reaction to a severe heart attack.
Panic attacks result in levels of anxiety that are so intense that the victim is terrified and
immobilized.
Panic attacks can appear at any age, but young adults are subject to them more
frequently. Some people may experience a few isolated attacks that do not develop into
a panic disorder which is more chronic and more serious. If the disorder is untreated, it
may become very disabling for the person. The fear of a panic attack can restrict a
person’s everyday activities and may even keep them home-bound. (See Lesson 3 on
Phobias. Agoraphobia may affect two or three people in the same family.)
Causes
We have hinted at some of the factors that may cause a panic attack, but let’s examine
them more closely. Physical and psychological causes of panic disorder work together.
Current research supports the theory that anxiety disorders may be the result of genetics
(abnormal biochemistry) or can be the result of faulty thinking. Studies with twins have
confirmed the possibility of “genetic inheritance” of the disorder.
panic attack – a
severe form of
anxiety  causing  a
person to feel
terrified  and
immobilized

214214
214214
2 1 4Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
In general, panic attacks seem to be linked with major turning points in life that are
potentially stressful. For example, getting a divorce and losing your family, becoming
chronically unemployed, or finding you are unable to pursue one of your favourite interests
would all be major transitions. When stress lowers a person’s resistance, the underlying
physical predisposition kicks in and triggers an attack. Although initially attacks may come
out of the blue, eventually sufferers may actually trigger an attack when their fear of having
an attack overpowers them. For example, if you fear your panic attack might appear when
you are on the balcony of a building because you fear heights, the most intense fear is the
fear of having an attack itself and not the fear of being on a balcony. Many people with
panic disorders display situational avoidance. In simple terms that means they go out of
their way to avoid any experiences that they believe are sensitive for them.
In summary, here are some factors contributing to panic attacks: stress, diet, bad
breathing habits, grief, a bad heart, unique brain chemistry, and being a perfectionist.
Symptoms
In general, panic attacks or anxiety attacks are a violent experience. People commonly
report that they feel like they are going insane. People experience the helpless feeling
that the symptoms will strike repeatedly and without warning. The symptoms may
occur in a wide variety of situations—they can even happen while the person is asleep.
What are some of the symptoms that occurring during a panic attack?
•   People usually experience difficulty breathing.
•   People cannot think clearly. Wrong signals are sent from the brain. Clear thinking
stops altogether.
•   Adrenaline is discharged into the system, the pupils dilate, hands and feet get
cold, and there is a tendency to sweat.
•   There is reduced oxygen supply to the heart causing an increase in heart rate. People
often report that they feel they are experiencing a heart attack or stroke, that they are
losing their mind, or are  on the verge of death. Blood pressure may be affected
causing the person to faint.
•   Because of lack of oxygen throughout the body, the person feels weak, confused,
and perhaps like they are suffocating.
•   There are strong feelings of impending doom and paralyzing fear.
•   Other physiological responses are hyperventilation, tremors, confusion, fatigue,
and tingling in fingers or toes.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
215215
215215
215
A recent study showed that people who suffer from panic disorders are more prone to
alcohol and other substance abuse. In addition they are greater suicide risks, spend less time
in satisfying hobbies, tend to be financially dependent on others, and are afraid of driving
more than a short distance away from home. Panic disorder often leads to other
complications such as phobias and depression.
Treatments
Panic disorder is highly treatable with a variety of available therapies. However,
therapies must focus on all the victim’s needs—physical, psychological, and
physiological. It is not unusual for panic attacks to initially be misdiagnosed as
something else.
If you suffer repeated attacks (four or more) you should definitely seek help. The first
part of therapy is largely informational. Many people are greatly helped by simply
understanding exactly what panic disorder is, and how many others suffer from it. Try
to find a therapist in your area and ask about their background experience in treating
panic attacks in particular.
Relaxation techniques are useful in helping someone get through an attack. These
techniques include retraining in proper breathing and positive visualization. When a
person is not breathing properly, they aren’t using their diaphragms effectively. They
may be breathing shallowly and too rapidly. Over breathing creates a shift in the body’s
chemical balance making it too alkaline.
In some cases medications may be needed to treat panic anxiety. Antianxiety
medications like benzodiazephine may be prescribed as well as antidepressants. Finally
a support group can be very helpful to some people.
A famous person who has admitted to having problems with panic attacks is the singer
Naomi Judd who used to make recordings and perform in concerts with her daughter,
Wynonna.

216216
216216
2 1 6Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Paranoia
Paranoia means false reasoning. Most authorities believe that the basic source of
paranoia is the great sense of dissatisfaction, inferiority, and failure in meeting the goals
of the parents. Delusions are a major part of paranoia.
Let’s take a minute to compare delusions and hallucinations. Delusions are false
beliefs—a person reaches the wrong conclusions about something. For example, a
delusion would be that I believe that my neighbour is spying and plotting against me.
Hallucinations are false sense perceptions—a person receives information through the
senses which is not accurate. For example, a hallucination would be that I see a misty figure
close by me and can hear it calling my name at all hours of the day and night.
Three types of delusions that may occur with paranoia are:
•   Delusions of reference—For example, two people are sharing a joke by the water
fountain. The paranoid person feels sure they are making fun of him/her.
•   Delusions of grandeur—For example, the person believes he is a member of the
Royal Family, or she believes she is a distinguished scientist.
•   Delusions of persecution—For example, the person believes that spying devices
have been inserted in their home to listen to what they are saying.
Symptoms
Someone with paranoia feels hypersensitive and feels resentful at the slightest
provocation. They are defensive, domineering, humourless, and critical. Patients
suffering from paranoia are usually of good intelligence and are able to express very
clearly how they feel.
Treatments
No adequate treatment has been found. Some psychiatrists advocate keeping patients in
the community unless their behaviour is disturbing or dangerous since confinement in a
hospital may arouse further resentment and make them even more suspicious that
people are “out to get them”. Tranquillizers are sometimes helpful. Electroshock
therapy may be tried in an attempt to break up their delusional thinking. Often,
however, the paranoiac is simply left alone and people learn to keep their distance.
Acquaintances of paranoiacs regard them as queer, obnoxious, and difficult.
paranoia – false
reasoning  leading
to  false
conclusions  about
what  is  taking
place
delusions – false
beliefs based on
inaccurate  ideas
hallucinations –
false sense
perceptions  based
on  inaccurate
feedback from the
senses

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
217217
217217
217
Manic-Depression
In Lesson 3 on Neurosis, we discussed depression. Another type of depressive disorder
is manic-depressive illness also known as bipolar depression because the person
affected displays moods that are different as day and night. Manic-depressive illness
involves cycles of depression along with cycles of elation or mania. Sometimes the
mood switches are dramatic and rapid, but most often they are gradual.
Causes
Studies have indicated that people with the illness have a somewhat different genetic
makeup than those who do not get ill. The reverse is not true: people with that genetic
makeup do not automatically have manic-depression. Studies have been done regarding
the imbalance of the brain chemicals noradrenaline and serotonin. But additional factors
such as a stressful environment are also involved.
Symptoms
Exaggerated mood change is the most outstanding feature of manic-depression. One
psychologist has described it as the “psychosis of emotional extremes”. The behaviour
of the manic-depressive person varies with the individual. In some cases the excitement
phase predominates; for others the depression phase is more intense. It usually starts in
adult life before the age of 35.
Most manic-depressive people are either manic or depressive but not both. An
individual with this mental disorder often has high achievement standards along with
extreme feelings of guilt and worthlessness if their goals are not met. The manic-
depressive person may turn hostility and anger inward where it becomes a destructive
force rather than outwardly expressing these feelings.
Mania
Usually in the manic or excited phase there is a great
sense of elation; the individual seems extremely
pleased with themselves. The manic patient
resembles an intoxicated person in many ways being
talkative, cheerful, and humorous one minute, then
suddenly becoming hostile and angry. Other
characteristics include unrealistic highs in self-
esteem, great energy increases, increased talking
(cannot be interrupted), distractibility (attention
moves constantly from one thing to another),
thoughts of suicide, and high risk taking behaviour.
Mania often affects thinking, judgment, and social
behaviour in ways that cause serious problems and embarrassment. For example, a
person might suddenly decide to sell their home and move to Hawaii when in a manic
phase.
manic-depression
–  (bipolar
depression) a
condition  of
emotional
extremes between
feelings  of  elation
to feelings of
despair

218218
218218
2 1 8Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Depression
The depressed phase is very different. Thought and talk alike seem to be slowed down.
Sadness and self-accusation mark the general mood, and in some cases it is necessary to
guard the individual from suicide. Depression may occur in three stages of severity. These
stages are mild, acute, and finally depressive stupor marked by immobility and
speechlessness. Other characteristics include frequent complaints of illness, major changes
in eating or sleeping patterns, persistent sadness, frequent crying, and low energy level.
Treatment
Effective treatment for manic-depressive illness usually includes education of the patient and
family about the illness, and psychotherapy (counselling with a psychologist). Medication
such as lithium and a group of drugs known as tricyclic antidepressants have been effective.
ECT or electroconvulsive shock is sometimes used especially if depression is severe. In
recent years, ECT has been much improved. The treatment is given in the hospital under
sedation so that people receiving ECT do not feel pain. (More will be said about ECT later
in this lesson.)
Usually after a few weeks or a few months, the manic-depressive individual makes a
good recovery and is able to resume their regular work. Attacks may recur in three out
of four eases. But in most instances, patients themselves or their friends notice the signs
in time so that these people may be put under medical care. Recovery rate has been
recorded at 90% or higher.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
219219
219219
219
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia involves a serious brain malfunction that greatly disturbs feelings,
perceptions, and rational thoughts. It is the most common of the major mental illnesses.
It carries a strong social stigma. Schizophrenia occurs in 1% of the general population,
but children with one schizophrenic parent have 10 times more of a chance of
developing the mental condition. Approximately 1/3 will have only one episode during
a lifetime (acute schizophrenia), about 1/3 will have recurring episodes but will be
relatively normal in between, and 1/3 will have symptoms for a lifetime (chronic
schizophrenia). Often schizophrenic symptoms appear in young men and women
between 15 and 30 years of age.
When something happens to “normal” people, they respond with appropriate emotions.
When a person develops schizophrenia, there is a gulf between a certain behaviour and
the appropriate emotional response to go with it. Anhedonia or the inability to experience
pleasure is also common with this condition.
Now let’s take a closer look at how schizophrenia develops. True schizophrenia is a
condition which evolves gradually over an extended period of time. Distorted thought
and behaviour patterns become entrenched, making a return to good mental health very
difficult. The first stage of schizophrenia or period of breakdown is very disturbing to
the individual. Confusion, anxiety, and panic are the individual’s reactions to the
strange things that seem to happen at the onset of schizophrenia. In the second stage,
the schizophrenic has reached the point where they have grown accustomed to their
symptoms. By the third stage, the condition has worsened to the point that it is known as the
“burned out” phase. Sometimes the individual becomes apathetic and responds to life’s
situations in very basic, simple terms.
Causes
What are some possible causes of schizophrenia? First, it is not caused by childhood
experiences or by poor parenting. Most researchers believe that both a biological
predisposition and environmental factors interact to determine who becomes
schizophrenic. Some scientist believe there is evidence that a chemical imbalance in the
body may be a factor in some cases of schizophrenia. The control centre of the brain
which acts like a switchboard for incoming data malfunctions. It is thought there may
be an excess of dopamine in the brain. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that facilitates
the movement of impulses or messages from one neuron in the brain to another. Drugs
that treat schizophrenia are neuroleptics which block dopamine and quiet the nerve
pathways in the brain thus reducing delusions and hallucinations. In some cases it is
possible that a viral infection or head injury may play a role in the illness.
schizophrenia – a
serious form of
psychosis
involving loss of
contact  with
reality,  delusions,
dulling  of  the
emotions,  hearing
voices
anhedonia – the
inability  to
experience
pleasure

220220
220220
2 2 0Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Heredity may be responsible in another sense in that the person inherits a predisposition
to schizophrenia. Schizophrenia may develop when stress from the environmental
situation combines with the heredity component. Stress can trigger or worsen the
symptoms when the illness is already present.
Symptoms
Personality changes are a major factor in recognizing schizophrenia. There is a loss of feeling
or emotions accompanied by a lack of interest and motivation. Changes occur in thought
patterns as the person drifts away from reality. Thinking may be coloured by delusions and
false beliefs. The person often believes their thoughts are being controlled by someone or
even broadcast to others through a TV set, for example. People  with schizophrenia often
“hear voices in their heads”. Sometimes the voices are threatening. Sensations are distorted.
Sometimes they feel nothing—not even real pain. They mistrust most people including those
people with whom they have close ties and they lack feelings of empathy toward others.
Schizophrenics appear to have deep longings for protection and dependency. They seem
incapable of sustained activity in fulfilling a specific goal. Schizophrenics may feel free
floating and nonexistent as a person. They have an altered sense of self which means they
lose sense of who they really are.
Early warning signs for family and friends to watch for can be helpful in getting early
treatment. Social withdrawal is a key symptom. Other symptoms include:
•   deterioration of personal hygiene
•   excessive fatigue or the inability to sleep
•   flat emotions or inability to express emotions
appropriate for the situation
•   flat, emotionless gaze (described as reptile-
like)
•   unexpected hostility
•   unusual sensitivity to stimuli (noise and light)
•   sensitivity to being touched by others
•   thoughts may “race”
•   bizarre behaviour and irrational statements
Schizophrenia has many different categories each
with its own symptoms. With paranoid
schizophrenia, delusions are prominent.
Hebephrenic schizophrenia is characterized by
intellectual disorganization, silliness, and absurd
ideas.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
221221
221221
221
Catatonic schizophrenia is perhaps one of the
most fascinating behavioural disorders. Catatonia or
muscular rigidity sets in more rapidly than in the
other schizophrenias. Vivid hallucinations occur. In
the excited phase of catatonia, the patient is in a
constant state of physical motion accompanied by
general over activity and perpetual talking. In the
stupor phase, the individual may become
expressionless, may refuse to communicate and may
assume an unusual pose. For example, if the
individual’s arm is raised and extended by someone
else, the arm may remain for an hour or more in the
position in which it was placed. In the stupor phase
the patient is still alert and aware, but remains
immobile. Although the individual’s body is inactive it
is not limp and the schizophrenic will resist any
attempt to change the body position.
Treatments
Because schizophrenic behaviour is unpredictable, the individual is often required to be
hospitalized for treatment. Such precautions ensure protection for both the individual
themselves and for those around them. Patients who have improved sufficiently after
treatment are able to return to the community, but they may still show some signs of
disturbance. Assistance from family and friends is important for the schizophrenic. When this
is lacking, often they fail to take medication, fail to find steady employment, and end up as
one of the many of the homeless “street-people” in our society. It is the second highest type
of mental illness for suicide risks. There is no cure for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia has been
treated primarily with antipsychotic medications which sufferers must take for the rest of
their lives.
A crisis is defined as the time when the person experiences a severe break with reality. If
you are with a schizophrenic person during a crisis episode, follow these hints to calm the
person and allow him/her to focus on you and be cooperative. Decrease all detractions such
as a TV set being on. Speak slowly and clearly. Repeat the message until the person
understands. Get the person to a hospital as quickly as possible so they can receive medical
treatment.
Many major cities across Canada have support groups. Patients or their families should
contact their local schizophrenic society for more information.
catatonic
schizophrenia –
the body reacts to
psychosis by
freezing  in
various poses
excited phase –
the stage of
catatonia  marked
by  constant
motion  and
continual  talking
stupor phase – the
stage  of  catatonia
marked by rigid,
immobile, and
expressionless
pose

222222
222222
2 2 2Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Self-Injurious  Behaviour
Self-injurious behaviour is included in the lesson on psychosis because it is an extreme way
to cope with a psychological/emotional problem. Self-injurious behaviour refers to any
deliberate behaviour that can cause tissue damage such as open wounds, bruises, and
redness without the conscious intent to commit suicide. Other names may also be used like
self-mutilation or slashing. Who self-injures? Three times more women than men engage in
self-injury. Often this behaviour begins during late childhood and early adolescence. These
personality factors may be involved: inability to express emotional needs, rapid mood
swings, inability to tolerate intense feelings, and having a perfectionist approach to tasks they
must do.
There are three major types of self-injury:
•   Major self-mutilation — the most extreme and uncommon kind, a great deal of
tissue is destroyed.
•   Stereotypic self-mutilation — fixed or rhythmic pattern such as repeated head-
banging.
•   Superficial or moderate self-mutilation — relatively little tissue is damaged. Injury
may occur by cutting the skin with razors, skin carving, burning, interference with
wound healing, needle sticking, self-punching, or scratching. Self-injury can
become addictive; some people find it difficult to give up the practice.
Causes
People who self-mutilate often have a history of violence and/or sexual abuse in their
past that they haven’t told anyone about. They may be drug or alcohol abusers or have
parents who were heavily involved in alcoholism. They may be devastated by the loss
of a parent through death or divorce. Sometimes they are confined to a residential
institution like a prison. These women feel numb and out of touch with life. Self-injury
is done to reconfirm the presence of one’s body. Some people use the expression, “I
had to pinch myself to see if I was dreaming”. Self-injurious behaviour is somewhat
similar—it is a check to confirm that they’re still alive.
Self-injury is anger turned inward. The common element that triggers self-injury is
anxiety from overwhelming psychological distress—intense anger, guilt, frustration, or
self-hatred. It feels safer and more controlled to direct anger at themselves than at their
abusers. Besides release of tension, self-injury converts unbearable emotional pain into
manageable physical pain. One psychologist proposed the theory that children who are
not nurtured and protected fail to learn to protect themselves. The biological theories
focus on chemical imbalance in the body. Drugs can affect neurotransmitters in the
brain which in turn affect how we manage our own self-harm behaviours. Sometimes
the reasons for self-injury may be social in nature—to seek attention, to control others,
or to avoid doing a task. (These would not be the major reasons for self-injury.)
self-mutilation –
injuring  the  body
as a means of
relieving  severe
stress and pain

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
223223
223223
223
Symptoms
What is slashing? Slashing involves using something
sharp like a razor, knife, or broken glass to cut your
skin, usually your arms. It’s fairly common in prisons.
Women and girls are most likely to slash, especially if
they are survivors of sexual abuse. The physical pain
seems to reduce the emotional pain the women are
feeling.
Moderate self-injury can be a symptom of many
disorders including post-traumatic stress disorder,
multiple personality disorder, eating disorders,
substance abuse, and clinical depression. The person
has a repeated impulse to destroy or alter body tissue.
There is increasing tension immediately before, and a
sense of relief following the act of self-harm. There is
no association between the self-harm act and actual
suicide.
Treatment
If you are prone to self-injury, stay away from the materials that are usually used for self-
injury. Remind yourself about the long term consequences like the scars. Stay away from
drugs and alcohol. Stay in the company of others. Find new ways to cope with your feelings
like mediation, exercise, and healthy hobbies. Learn to nurture yourself. When you are very
angry, vigorous physical activity may help. Visit a therapist to help express your anger and
make changes in your life. There are more socially acceptable forms of self-mutilation such
as piercing the ears, nose, naval skin, and other body parts. Most people who self-harm
have problems with low self-esteem and are disgusted by their own self-injury behaviour.
If you are a friend of someone who self-injures, don’t shame the person. Understand that
they are under a lot of stress and give them your support. Stay with the person until the
impulse to self-injure passes and encourage them not be alone.

224224
224224
2 2 4Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Organic  Psychosis
Organic psychosis is any behavioural disorder that can be attributed to damage or disease
in the body that seriously affects one’s mental state. Senile psychosis is the term for the
psychological disorder associated with the organic brain damage that occurs in old age. The
term senility is applied to the general deterioration that may occur with brain damage due to
hardening of the walls of the arteries which results in a decreased circulation of blood in the
brain. You will study Alzheimer’s Disease (senile psychosis) in more detail in the next part of
this lesson.
Alcohol Psychosis
Alcohol Psychosis is another form of organic psychosis
which has its origin in excessive alcoholic use over long
periods of time. Alcoholism is one of the most serious
forms of addiction. Heavy drinking sometimes causes
deterioration of physical health with damage to the liver
and brain cells. Psychological functioning is disrupted as
well because concentration, memory, and judgment
frequently suffer. Alcohol is a depressant not a stimulant.
The chronic alcohol user is less alert, responds slowly,
and is less dependable.
Here are some mental illnesses that are basically alcoholic in origin. Delirium tremens or
D.T.s is a behaviour disorder of a chronic alcoholic brought on by withdrawal from alcohol
and marked by body trembling, hallucinations, irritability, apprehension, and confused
thoughts. For example, the victim may see the walls covered with horrible insects, or see
toads or snakes on the floor. Acute hallucinosis is very similar to delirium tremens. For
example, the victim hears voices talking, accusing, and threatening. In other words, the
person experiences auditory hallucinations when they have acute hallucinosis. Korsakoff’s
psychosis is a behaviour disorder of some older chronic alcoholics that is marked by an
inability to remember previous experiences, especially events that have just taken place.
Patients fill in the gaps in their memories by inventing fantasies. It is thought to be caused in
part by dietary deficiencies.
Alcoholism may be treated with chlordiazepoxide to control the anxiety, restlessness, and
insomnia seen in the initial stages of abstinence from alcohol. Multivitamin medications are
also helpful. Disulfiram or antabuse is a drug that will make the alcoholic very ill if they try to
drink while taking the drug. It may prevent the recovering alcoholic from impulsively taking a
drink because they know it will make them violently ill.
Alcoholics’ Anonymous is an organization composed of problem drinkers who have given
up alcohol or who are trying to do so. In that sense, Alcoholics’ Anonymous uses group
therapy to discuss problems and offer support in a social setting with lots of personal
contact.
organic psychosis
–  behavioural
disorders  caused
by damage to the
body  parts
alcohol psychosis
– a type of
organic  psychosis
that occurs when
a person is
addicted  to
alcohol

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
225225
225225
225
Alzheimer’s Disease
Most often Alzheimer’s affects people 60 and over,
but it has also been known to strike people in their
early 40s and 50s. About 300,000 Canadians are
afflicted. Dementia is a decline in intellectual ability
severe enough to interfere with a person’s daily
routine. It can have many causes. Alzheimer’s is the
most common disorder. Other conditions that
produce dementia are strokes, Huntington’s chorea,
Parkinson’s disease, depression, drug interactions,
stress (due to serious health problems or death of a
spouse, for example), thyroid problems, and vitamin
deficiencies (B-12). Memory loss and changes in
mood and behaviour are early signs of dementia.
Early and accurate diagnosis is essential to
determine the cause of the dementia.
Causes
Alzheimer’s Disease is characterized by the progressive degeneration of brain cells. Cause
of the disease is not known, but heredity and environmental toxins are suspected. Only 5 to
10% of the Alzheimer’s Disease cases are believed to be caused by purely genetic factors.
Groups of nerve endings in the outer layer of the brain degenerate and disrupt the passage
of electrochemical signals between cells. Brain shrinkage occurs because many nerve cells
have been destroyed.
Symptoms
In the initial stages, the individual experiencing Alzheimer’s Disease exhibits minor symptoms
that are often attributed to other illnesses. One of the most dominant symptoms is a
progressive deterioration of memory, judgement, and concentration. Mental powers such as
reasoning and verbal skills are affected as well as physical coordination. A spouse or a
friend may notice changes in spending habits, neglect of nutrition, sanitation, grooming, home
care, or unusual mood swings or increased alcohol consumption. Gradually the individual
becomes more forgetful. As memory loss increases, changes also appear in personality,
mood, and behaviour. People with dementia have short attention spans, walk around a lot,
seldom sit still for long, and are often agitated.
dementia – a
group of diseases
of the brain
characterized  by
loss of
intellectual
abilities (memory,
thinking  skills),
personality
changes,  and
deterioration  of
physical
coordination

226226
226226
2 2 6Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Treatment
It may be helpful to provide simple memory aids to
assist the Alzheimer’s patient such as a prominent
calendar, lists of daily tasks, and directions about how
to use common items in the home. Understandably,
people with Alzheimer’s Disease find it difficult to
comprehend the changes in their thinking and behaviour
which may lead to frustrations.
An experimental drug called THA is undergoing testing
in the United States to treat the disease. It may help
reduce memory loss and other symptoms in some
patients. Currently prevention or cure is unknown. It is
fatal.
Recently, a nurse who has been a long term worker with the elderly, discovered an unusual
therapeutic idea. A life-size doll about the size of a year old baby, with a fairly realistic-
looking face brought some comfort to Alzheimer’s patients. They could hold and hug the
doll; it distracted them when they were restless and agitated; it provided something to talk to
while they were alone; or they could talk to others about the doll. Having the doll helped
them reminisce a little about their younger days.
Treatments: What Is Working And What Is Not Working
There are two major perspectives about abnormal behaviour. One is the medical model, the
other is known as the psychosocial model. The main premise of the medical model is that
mental disorders are a type of disease or illness arising from a malfunction inside the person.
The treatment prescribed, which could be psychotherapy or drugs, is aimed at changing the
patient’s behaviour and attitudes. The psychosocial model focuses on the interaction
between the individual and the person’s social environment. The self-concept is given careful
consideration. Mending relationships within the patient’s social environment is the main
target for treatment suggested by the psychosocial model.
Before we become too involved in discussing various methods of therapy, we should be
aware that most therapists prefer the eclectic approach. You may remember it from
Lesson 1. What does that mean? It is a very open-minded and flexible approach,
surveying a wide range of theories and choosing the best ideas from here and there
along a broad radius of ideas. The result is an integrated type of therapy where various
techniques are adapted to suit each individual case, but a large range of possible
theories are explored in the process. For example, the psychobiological approach
incorporates information from the biological, psychological, and social realm that may
have contributed to the behavioural disorder. It covers a vast scope of possibilities.
medical model –
the  theory  that
mental disorders
are a type of
disease  arising
from a
malfunction
within  the  person
psychosocial
model – the
theory  that  mental
disorders are a
type of disease
arising form an
interaction
between  the
person and the
social
environment
eclectic view – a
psychological
theory  built  on
ideas from a
number of
different  theories

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
227227
227227
227
Physical Treatment of Behavioural Disorders
Somatotherapy refers to the treatment of the body for behavioural disorders with such
methods as shock treatments, surgery, or drugs. Shock treatment has received mixed
reactions. For a time, the use of insulin shock was popular. An overdose of insulin was
administered causing a patient to become unconscious. When the brain lacks sugar
through the process of shock, normal pathways to the brain are reintroduced and
fortified. Therefore insulin shock returns the patient to normal functioning.
Electroconvulsive therapy or ECT is another type of physical treatment. The
electroconvulsive shock is induced by attaching two electrodes to each side of the
head and passing an electric current through them producing convulsions in the patient.
Following this, a state of coma occurs lasting from several minutes to several hours. It is
not certain which particular aspects of the shock process brings about positive
changes—the coma, the changes in the nervous system from the shock, the violent
psychological reaction, or the idea that the patient has taken the shock as punishment
which reduces their sense of guilt.
Today’s form of shock therapy is different than it was many years ago. It has undergone
many refinements since it was first introduced in 1938. It is now called faradic
stimulation. A small, battery-operated “shock stick” with less electrical current than a
pacemaker is used. Today, the patient is put to sleep and given a muscular relaxant. A
small amount of electric current is then applied to the patient’s temples. This produces a
seizure.
ECT has proven highly beneficial in the treatment of severe depression. It is also
sometimes used with patients in depressive cycles of manic-depression. Although it
does not appear to be especially helpful with schizophrenia, it is occasionally given to
patients who present serious safety risks and do not respond to medication.
PhysicalPhysical
TreatmentsTreatments
EclecticEclectic
ApproachApproach
PsychologicalPsychological
TreatmentsTreatments
Group
Therapy
Psychoanalysis
Play
Therapy
Sleep
Deprivation
Prefrontal
Lobotomy
Ataractics
Faradic
Stimulation
Insulin
Shock
somatotherapy –
the treatment of
mental illness by
drugs, shock
therapy,  and
sometimes surgery
electroconvulsive
shock (ECT) –
treatment of a
mental  condition
by sending a
shock  through  the
brain

228228
228228
2 2 8Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
Recommendations are being made that this form of treatment continue to be available
for those who freely choose it, but that its use should be monitored by many special
safeguards. Side effects remain a major drawback. Memory loss often occurs. Other
side effects are: confusion (usually for a day or two), muscle aches, headaches, and
nausea. The elderly (especially depressed elderly women) now account for about half
of the people receiving shock therapy.
The most widely known type of psychosurgery is the prefrontal lobotomy. The nerve
fibres which join the hypothalamus with the prefrontal lobes are severed during this
operation. The lobotomy operation dulls a person’s emotional responses and may cause
a person to feel a loss of self-continuity (the feeling that they are the same person).
Since psychosurgery is irreversible and extreme, it is regarded as a drastic last measure.
It is not a recommended alternative nowadays.
Drugs are another type of physical intervention that may be used to correct underlying
chemical abnormalities. Ataractics is the term for drugs used in the treatment of mental
and emotional disorders. The application of drug treatments seem to alleviate some of
the guilt felt by both the patients and their families. The notion is that if the patient is
being treated for a chemical imbalance, then no one is really responsible for “driving
the person crazy”. Thus the illness is no more shameful than diabetes, epilepsy, or high
blood pressure. The chemical composition of the mentally ill person’s brain does differ
significantly from that of a normal person. Missing chemicals may be identified and
therefore can be replaced. For example, one of the chemicals lacking in the brain of the
mentally ill is adenine. An injection of malononitrile will set in motion the production of
adenine.
ataractics – drugs
used in the
treatment  of
mental disorders

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
229229
229229
229
Antipsychotics are a major treatment for the nonagitated, psychotic patients. Another
class of drugs widely used is benzodiazepines. The immediate goal of treatment of the
acutely agitated psychotic individual is to reduce the agitation, irritability, and/or
hostility to a level where the patient is not a physical danger to himself/herself or to
others. The alleviation of hallucinations and/or delusions causing agitated behaviour is
the ultimate goal. If the psychotic person is too upset to take oral medication, drugs may
be administered by intramuscular injection.
Presently, the importance of nutrition in maintaining or restoring mental health is
receiving wide attention. For example, megavitamin therapy has yielded some positive
results. A low carbohydrate, high protein diet is supplemented by large doses of
vitamins. It is not yet precisely understood how this therapy works, but findings have
been very encouraging.
All of the physical treatments mentioned treat the symptoms of mental illness, they do
not attempt to alter the causes except in the case of a chemical imbalance. But if the
treatment reduces or eliminates the symptoms, the patient can return to a more or less
normal life.
Psychological Treatment of Behavioural Disorders
Psychotherapy simply means treatment for behavioural disorders through
psychological means. We will review a variety of them now.
Group therapy offers an opportunity for persons with behavioural problems to use the
empathy and support of a small group to resolve their conflicts. The group leader may
either provide direct guidelines or be nondirective during therapy. Thus one therapist
can give support to several people at once. The group provides a setting for people to
explore their common problems in an open, uninhibited way with the realization that
others have experienced a similar hardship. For group therapy to be valuable,
participants must be capable of forming relationships with others and must be willing to
express their feelings to the group.
psychotherapy –
using
psychological
methods to treat
behavioural
problems
group therapy –
the treatment of
behavioural
disorders  with
talk-sessions  and
support of the
group

230230
230230
2 3 0Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
When other therapies seem to fail, hypnotherapy may be used. In this approach,
hypnosis is teamed with other therapeutic procedures. One common use of
hypnotherapy is age regression which brings to light and examines events of early
childhood.
Psychoanalysis was a therapy used by Sigmund Freud to bring repressed memories
and hidden conflicts into conscious awareness (Lesson 1). It is still a popular method
used by a number of therapists many years later. One of the merits of psychoanalytic
therapy is abreaction or the expression of a repressed emotion. Another name for this
is catharsis or the discharge of emotional tensions by verbalizing one’s feelings. For
example, Sally always believed her older sister was favoured by her parents which
caused her to be bitter. Many years later she was able to talk about the pain she felt
when she was ignored by her parents.
The psychoanalytic technique is best suited to a certain type of individual. These
characteristics are important in a patient considering psychoanalysis: above average
intelligence, introspective, good verbal expression, not seriously disturbed, and
between 18 and 40 years of age. The patient must still have a fairly healthy personality
so they can understand what’s going on and help with their own cure. Often
psychoanalytic treatment extends over a period of several years.
Sleep deprivation has been studied for many years as a possible treatment for
depression. It involves keeping people up for nearly a day or longer than normal. What
sleep deprivation does is accelerate the response to antidepressant medication. Sleep
deprivation benefits may have something to do with body rhythms. It is not a helpful
therapy for people with milder forms of depression or those who are manic-depressive.
Play therapy for young children serves
several purposes. It is designed to help them
become aware of valid reasons for their
feelings and behaviours. For children who
have been emotionally abused or neglected,
another purpose is to provide them with an
opportunity to interact with caring, sensitive
adults. Free play is often used which means
various toys are provided and the children are
given the opportunity to play with them in
any way they choose. Doing art work and
then explaining what they have drawn and
why, is another way to gain valuable
information from young children. Through play therapy, children may reveal
information about themselves that they cannot talk about such as sexual abuse, sibling
rivalry, dysfunctional family lifestyles, and damaging discipline practices.
abreaction –
expression  of
repressed  feelings
and  emotional
pain  through
verbal responses
introspective –
thoughtful
reflection  about  a
personal  problem
play therapy –
observing  young
children in a play
situation  to
determine reasons
for their
behavioural
problems

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
231231
231231
231
Treatment or Abandonment?
Sometimes therapy alone is not adequate for seriously ill mental patients. Institutionalized
care may be prescribed for those who present a threat to themselves or to those around them.
Families of these patients may not be able to provide the in-depth care and supervision they
require. There are critical shortages of acute-care beds in the psychiatric units of hospitals to
provide care for patients with severe problems.
In recent years the philosophy relating to the mentally ill has changed. At one time these people
were institutionalized indefinitely. The new change took the focus away from institutions and
emphasized having these patients released to the community to continue their recovery and
rehabilitation in a more “normal” situation, surrounded by friends and family. There is just one
problem, however. Many of these people have been abandoned by friends and family because
these care-givers have found the amount of support and supervision required for the mentally ill is
just too demanding in addition to their own commitments. Without follow-up support,
(community clinics to monitor ongoing treatment and medication) many former mental patients
neglect to take their medication and check-in for necessary medical appointments. After that
happens, they usually begin experiencing the same symptoms that sent them to a mental institution
in the first place. As their mental illness becomes more pronounced, these people often find
themselves wandering the streets and seeking shelter where ever they can as homeless people.
Others end up in the criminal justice system for crimes that have been committed when what they
really need is psychiatric care. Institutional care can be reduced but before that happens, the
money must be spent to make the patients ready for the community, and the community ready for
the patients.
Multiple  Personalities
Multiple personality is now formally known as Dissociative Identity Disorders (DID). For
this section we will still refer to it as multiple personality because that label gives a more
accurate understanding of the behavioural problem. At one time it was surrounded by
mystery and thought to be a very rare phenomenon. Research has shown that it is much
more common than it was believed to be. There are estimates that up to 1% of the
population may be affected in some way which would mean it is as much of a problem as
schizophrenia and depression.
Multiple personality (MPD) is a mental process which produces a lack of connection or
continuity in a person’s thoughts, memories, feeling, actions, and most importantly in their
sense of identity. During the period of time when a person is in that state, connections are not
made between certain key information as it normally would be. What would cause such a
dramatic upheaval to occur in a person’s thought patterns? When faced with overwhelming
traumatic situations from which there is no physical escape, a child may resort to “going
away” in his or her head. Most people do that to a lesser degree like daydreaming or getting
lost in a book or movie, all of which involve losing touch with conscious awareness of one’s
immediate surroundings. This ability is typically used by children as an extremely
effective defense against acute physical and emotional pain or anxious anticipation of
that pain. This is a creative survival technique allowing the child to sever memories of
the pain and pretend the trauma had not occurred. Because the dissociative escape is so
multiple
personality – the
person’s sense of
identity  becomes
fragmented  into
many separate
identities

232232
232232
2 3 2Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
effective, children become practised at doing it and may automatically use this whenever
they feel threatened or anxious. It may occur in early childhood as a response to extreme,
repeated physical, sexual and/or emotional abuse especially when children are at a
sensitive developmental stage usually before age nine. Because this process can
produce changes in memory, people who frequently dissociate often find their sense of
personal history and identity are affected.
Let’s begin by studying a person who actually had a multiple personality disorder,
Billy Milligan. He was the first person in US history to be found not guilty of major
crimes by reason of insanity because he possessed multiple personalities. The crime
he was on trial for was the kidnap and rape of three women. After in-depth
interviews and psychological assessment, it was determined that he had 24 distinct
personalities. The childhood history of Billy Milligan revealed that his mother and
her children (including Billy) were subjected to physical abuse including sadistic
sexual abuse. His stepfather had often threatened him with silence by stating he
would murder Billy, bury him, and tell everyone that he had run away.
A person diagnosed with MPD has within them two or more entities, or personality
states, each with its own independent way of relating, perceiving, thinking and
remembering about themselves and their lives. It is important to keep in mind that
although these alternate personality states may appear to be very different, they are all
manifestations of a single person.
Let’s return to Billy’s story.
Each one of Billy’s personalities was quite unique and each one had a different
name. Some were male, some were female. The ages of his many personalities
varied from young children to people in their teens and early twenties. Some of
the personalities had special talents that the others did not possess such as
unique abilities in art work. Some of them had unique speech patterns; some of
them spoke with accents. Some of the personalities were considered good or
innocent; others were evil and undesirable. Some personalities had habits that
the others didn’t (like smoking), and some had physical disabilities that belong
to them alone (dyslexia). Many of the personalities were aware of some of the
other existing personalities but not all of them. Some of Billy’s personalities had
very high IQs (130) and some had unusually low IQs (75). Billy described the
times when he was being replaced by another personality from within like being on a
stage, and when it is not your turn to be the personality who has control, you
relinquish the spotlight and move to the wings of the stage in the darkness.
Integration of all personalities into the “basic” personality is the ultimate goal of
therapy for multiple personality. But some cases of multiple personality are too
complex to be resolved.

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Section  Three:  Studying  Behaviour
233233
233233
233
What are some of the general symptoms of multiple personality? People affected may
experience the following: depression, mood swings, suicidal tendencies, sleep disorders,
panic attacks, phobias, alcohol and drug abuse, compulsions and rituals, psychotic-like
symptoms, and eating disorders. They can also experience amnesias, time loss, trances, and
out-of-body experiences. Some may have a tendency toward self-persecution, even
violence.
Treatment of multiple personalities holds a lot of hope, although it should be mentioned that
patients often spend years living with misdiagnoses. That occurs because the symptoms are
very similar to those of many other psychiatric conditions. Dissociative disorders are highly
responsive to individual psychotherapy. Treatment is long-term, intensive, and invariably
painful because it involves remembering and reclaiming the dissociated traumatic
experiences. The objective of therapy is to integrate or fuse together the whole personality
that has been fractured or fragmented into many separate compartments from the core
personality which creates multiple personalities in the first place. Fusion involves the
process of bringing all aspects of the person’s self together by communicating and
remembering what each part does in order to get rid of the amnesia. Then the therapist
works toward getting all the pieces of the personality to work together so the person can
return to good mental health.
Summary
This lesson focused on a number of very serious personality disturbances. Each one has
different causes, symptoms, and treatments.
fusion –
integrating  or
bringing  together
all parts of the
personality
To summarize:
•   Psychosis is a serious state of mental disruption or abnormality. A person with
psychosis may be withdrawn and have confused ideas about reality.
•   There is a stigma attached to psychotic behaviour, which means that it is
viewed as being shameful or disgraceful.
•   When panic attacks occur, a person feels such intense anxiety that they fear
they may be having a heart attack.
•   People with paranoia are insecure individuals who have an arrogant, superior
attitude and a distorted, suspicious view of their relationships with others
called delusions.
•   Manic-depressive disorders are sometimes referred to as bipolar depression
because they involve extreme mood changes from being depressed to being
extremely elated.
•   Schizophrenia is one of the more serious and common mental illnesses. There
is a separation between reality and appropriate responses and emotions.

234234
234234
2 3 4Section  Three:  Studying  BehaviourADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
•   Schizophrenics may hear voices in their heads or lose sense of who
they are. There is evidence to indicate that a serious chemical
imbalance may be one of the main factors.
•   People who are involved with various forms of self-injurious behaviours
are often those who have an abusive past. They are turning their anger
inward to hurt themselves as a cry for help.
•   Alcohol psychosis may develop when individual’s have a serious and
prolonged drinking problem.
•   Alzheimer’s Disease is caused by degeneration of the brain cells affecting
memory, judgment, communication skills, and physical coordination.
•   The different kinds of psychosis may be treated in a number of different
ways.
•   The eclectic approach involves taking the best parts of a number of
different theories to build one theory.
•   Electroconvulsive shock therapy is one form of treatment that has many
strong supporters, and many adversaries.
•   Drug therapy with a number of different antipsychotic drugs has proven to
be successful in many cases.
•   Play therapy can be used for some types of behavioural disorders
affecting young children.
•   Psychoanalysis utilizes the theories of Sigmund Freud and studies
psychosis by examining childhood experiences.
•   Multiple personalities is a serious type of psychosis that occurs when
childhood traumas may cause a person to dissociate or fragment their
identities.
A
Turn to Assignment Booklet 7 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices235
SS
SS
S
44
44
4
SS
SS
S
ECTIONECTION
ECTIONECTION
ECTION
FF
FF
F
OUROUR
OUROUR
OUR
Making Choices
Making Choices Lesson 1: Mastering Your Life
Overview
This final lesson offers you inspiration for self-improvement without sounding “preachy”.
Some of the suggestions presented will not appeal to your personal lifestyle. Other
suggestions, you may say, are self-evident. Why waste time repeating them, you ask? It
might be well to consider that there is no benefit in knowing these principles for self-
improvement if you have never applied them. So think about these ideas and how some of
them may be useful to you. Throughout the lesson you will read about some special success
stories. Many ordinary people just like you have overcome handicaps to reach outstanding
achievements. The lesson concludes with career information related to the field of
psychology.

236236
236236
2 3 6Section  Four:  Making  ChoicesGeneral  Psychology  20
intrinsic
motivation  –  the
urge to do
something  based
on  natural
enjoyment  of  the
activity
Lesson 1 focuses on these topics:
•   Basic Tools: Getting Motivated
•   Introductory Plan
•   Choices: Selecting Time
•   Choices: Selecting Attitude
•   Choices: Selecting Strategy
•   Choices: Selecting Goals
•   Practising Choices
•   Choices: Meaningful Relationships
•   Final Reminders - Lessons of Life
•   Hope
•   Exploring Career-Related Abilities, Interests, Skills, and Values
•   Jobs Available in Psychology
Basic  Tools:  Getting  Started
You might believe that motivation is a simple word with just one meaning, but
motivation varies in direction, intensity, and results.
Intrinsic motivation means a person is determined to do something based on a natural
enjoyment of the activity. Often one achievement leads directly to another. Intelligence and
personality are usually developed and strengthened by intrinsic motivation. Another positive
by-product of intrinsic motivation is that goals may become more clear and more precisely
defined because the person is involved in meaningful activities. Feelings of self-worth
and personal responsibility improve with intrinsic motivation. Surprisingly, the
introduction of an external reward to a situation where intrinsic motivation was previously
functioning causes a decline in intrinsic motivation. Participating in an activity seems
the sole reward for intrinsically motivated tasks.

General  Psychology  20Section  Four:  Making  Choices
237237
237237
237
extrinsic
motivation  –  the
urge to do
something  based
on the promise of
an  external
reward
On the other hand, extrinsic motivation uses external rewards and punishments to
control behaviour. An artificial link is established between the individual’s goals and the
behaviour he or she follows to reach those goals.
Extrinsic Motiv
ation: Sandra’s father promised her an
expensive new coat if she got three A’s on her report card.
Therefore, Sandra is motivated to raise her marks by the promise
of an external reward—a new coat. How often do parents resort
to extrinsic motivation?
Intrinsic Motivation: Patricia was so interested in the topic
“Early Canadian Explorers” that she spent many hours on her
own researching information in the library. Patricia is intrinsically
motivated because she finds the activity itself is directly
satisfying; she does not have to be pushed by an outside
reward.
You have heard frequently that people seldom function at full capacity. Only a fraction
of the human potential is ever used. Lack of intrinsic motivation may be partly the
cause. An individual’s degree of enthusiasm has just as great an impact on achievement
as aptitude and natural talents. What part does intrinsic motivation have in your life?
Robin Williams – In high school he was voted “Least Likely to Succeed”. He
became a star of television and many successful movies such as “Mrs.
Doubtfire.”
Introductory  Plan
This lesson takes you through several steps to help you examine your life and think
about the direction it is taking. The key word throughout is Choices. That means things
are in your hands. You have the power to use your natural abilities and make life a great
experience.
As with all people, when you were born, you had unlimited potential. Much of that
potential was programmed out of you at a very early age. You may have grown up in
an environment that expected less than the best from you. You may have been told what
you could not do. You may have been persuaded by your conditioning to become
average or less than average. Even if you believe those messages, that does not
diminish the potential that was there in the first place.

238Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
Quit believing in the message, “I can’t”. Make a choice. What incredible roadblocks
self-doubts can set up in your life if you let them. These negative ideas stop you, hold
you back, and prove to you that you are incapable. It is not the rest of the world that
prevents you from achieving, it is your own disbelief in yourself. It has been said that a
person’s I CAN is more important than I.Q. That means that your fortitude and
determination to succeed can take you farther than the talents of a bright person who is
lazy.
First take responsibility for your own life and abandon the foolish notion that you are a
helpless victim of fate. If you feel you are always mistreated or misunderstood, examine the
situation fully from within to see how you are at fault. Establish your own identity. Be in
charge of yourself and enjoy the feeling it brings. You are strictly accountable for your own
life and for your shortcomings. A person doesn’t need permission to start leading a full life;
that signal comes from within us.
Many of the positive and negative ideas you have about yourself are rooted in your history.
Think about the following questions.
SELF QUIZ
You may want to write down ideas for yourself on a sheet of loose leaf paper. Sometimes
a flash of insight will come to you as you are physically recording an event or describing an
emotion in writing.
Who Are You
1.When and where were you born?
2.Describe your childhood; think about your family life—your parents, siblings, and
grandparents.
3.Who and what influenced you the most?

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices239
4.How did you picture yourself when you were growing up—smart, happy,
serious?
5.If you could change something about your childhood, what would you change?
What Are Your Goals?
1.What do you want to do for a living?
2.Describe the family life you want to have.
3.What do you want your financial status to be?

240Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
4.Where do you want to live?
5.How do you want to spend your spare time?
Sylvester Stallone – Before he became famous for his many movies like
“Rocky” and “Rambo”, he worked at a great variety of jobs like fish salesman,
theatre usher, horse trainer, deli worker, bouncer, zoo attendant, and motel
superintendent.
Choices:  Selecting  Time
Learn by your mistakes.
Live for today.
Save for tomorrow.
“We are always getting ready to live but not really living.” (Ralph Waldo Emerson)
Do those words describe your approach to life? Our
whole philosophy of time, and how we organize
our lives around what time means to us, will have
far-reaching consequences. Let’s approach the issue
by examining these ideas concerning living for the
present moment.
“Life for Now” is an expression used by the
islanders of Trinidad to sum up their belief that the
immediate moment is all any person can count on in
life. Yesterday is gone; tomorrow has not yet
arrived; but you have today. Make the most of
today. Seek to be in touch with what you are doing,
how you are feeling and acting, and what is
happening to you right now.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices241
Now is often forgotten and becomes nothing more than the time you pass through on
your way to the future. The expectations and the goals we have take control. One loses
one’s personal self and sense of the moment by becoming too entangled with
accumulating goods. Life should be focused on people, not on the pursuit of future
material goals.
There is nothing wrong with knowing what you want out of life in a material sense nor in
dreaming of owning a beautiful new car and a lovely house. But if these material goals are
allowed to become the central focus of your life instead of personal growth, life will pass
you by and you might not be able to enjoy them.
Time consumed in looking forward to tomorrow’s achievements or in lamenting about the
past, is time lost in the vital present. The loss of that present time cuts down on your
awareness of what is happening right now. Past and future are certainly relevant, but it is
necessary to ask how relevant they are and to give them no more than the appropriate
amount of attention. Don’t plan for the future at the expense of the present.
You can learn from your past mistakes. But even if your problems originated from past
situations, those problems exist in the present and must be dealt with in the present. They
can only be worked out in terms of your day-to-day actions. For example, how you solve
your problems now, how you experience joys now, your feelings and the degree to which
you share them with your loved ones now, will determine the nature of your relationship.
Your interaction with others now is what makes for a meaningful relationship. If there is no
relating now, how can there be in the future?
One man made himself more aware of “today” and the present by having a daily calendar
rather than a monthly one where only a single day is shown at a time. As each day
ended, he threw that calendar day in the waste basket and looked forward to the
immediate upcoming day that appeared on his calendar. Think about making the most
of the present.
Look to this day!
For it is life,
the very life of life...
For yesterday
is already a dream
and tomorrow
is only a vision;
But today, well lived,
makes every yesterday
a dream of happiness,
and every tomorrow
a vision of hope.

242Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
self-image – the
picture  or  concept
a person has of
himself or herself
Choices:  Selecting  Attitude
“People are just about as happy as they make up their minds to be.”
Abraham Lincoln
More important than who you are, where you are, or what you possess, is how you feel
about it. This means attitude. Did you realize that most unhappiness is self-manufactured?
Not only do people lack a positive attitude about their daily circumstances, but more
importantly they lack a proper attitude toward themselves. You have two basic choices,
either lift yourself up in life or put yourself down. Which pathway will get you the farthest in
life’s journey?
“This above all: to thine own self be true.”
William Shakespeare
What is the self-image and how will it affect your attitude? The self-image is one’s own
conception of oneself. One’s self-image depends on past successes and failures. Your
emotions, attitudes, goals, and behaviour are all consistent with your self-image. Your
everyday experiences, either good or bad, strengthen and reaffirm your self-image. Any
ideas consistent with the self-image are accepted; those that are not consistent are rejected.
Therefore if you carry a negative self-image you may be rejecting many beneficial ideas that
come your way.
To summarize, your first important step is gaining a positive evaluation of the self. You
must take time to explore the inner self, liking, accepting, and nurturing the treasures
that you find. You need not be handicapped by a negative self-image, however. The
self-image can be changed and should be subjected to serious examination and review
from time to time. You must be realistic about your capabilities, but remember some of
the wonderful stories people tell about succeeding against all odds.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices243
self-fullfilling
prophecy – a
strong  belief  that
comes true
because we make
it  happen
Michael Jordan – The star basketball player for the Chicago Bulls did not
qualify for his high school basketball team one year because he wasn’t good
enough.
Let’s see how your attitude operates to defeat you before you even begin a project.
How can the self-fulfilling prophecy be either beneficial or damaging? The self-
fulfilling prophecy is a preconceived notion about a situation. This preconceived
“hunch” determines your actions and eventually these strong thoughts about an event
actually do come true. Everything falls neatly
into place as expected and the person can then
say, I told you so” or “I knew that would
happen”. People are guided by a life dream
based on their childhood experiences. That
means that you map out a pathway for your life
to take built around your past experiences. Once
the life dream has developed, every experience
that follows is seen in such a way as to reaffirm
the original belief. The self-fulfilling prophecy is
very dominant in such a situation. People
internalize beliefs they have about themselves. If
you believe you’re good at something, then you
begin to act as though you’re good and then it
becomes the self-fulfilling prophecy. For
example, one of the star players for the Toronto
Bluejays knew he was going to make a key play
during the World Series baseball games. Sure
enough, he got the winning home run.
Remember, your particular set of circumstances in life is not determined by outward
conditions but by your thoughts towards these conditions. Thus the first step is
changing your thoughts or your attitude. Do not accept negative circumstances as
something that is inevitable. For example, suppose you have a neighbour with two
yappy little dogs that make a lot of noise. You can view them as a nuisance or maybe
even an outright disturbance. Or you can see them as “security guards” for your house,
because burglars avoid houses where they can be detected by dogs who make a lot of
racket. Circumstances are the same in both cases—two barking dogs. But your attitude
can differ.
Since work is usually unavoidable, it is wise to approach the inevitable with a positive
outlook. Enjoy your work; chalk up the benefits of your endeavours. How you think
has a marked effect on your level of energy. If you become intensely engrossed in an
activity, you will continue it indefinitely and effortlessly. People who lack energy may

244Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
be disorganized by mental conflicts. Your work should be planned with worthwhile
goals in mind. You can remain youthful all your life by filling your days with work and
leisure activities that you find exciting and challenging.
Believe in yourself, be true to yourself, and insist that you have a right to be happy. Some
people spend a lifetime blaming themselves for their previous mistakes. That will erode a
positive attitude. Even when you reach what you consider to be the lowest point in your life,
you know that you have a good foundation for growth from this experience and the only
way to go is up. Remember your achievements and let the compliments bestowed by your
successes brighten your spirits. Many people select a motto that has special personal
meaning and inspiration to carry them through the dark points in their life.
Victor Frank who survived the Nazi Concentration Camps said:
“Our greatest Freedom is the Freedom to choose our attitude.”
You must build confidence in your abilities and this can be done by monitoring the quality of
thoughts which habitually occupy your mind. Remember that attitudes are more powerful
than the facts which act as obstacles. Your attitude and your mental state can even affect
recovery from a serious illness. Many people visualize their body fighting off a physical
disease and being victorious. This can have an actual impact on what happens to you
medically. (In the final section of this lesson we will talk about the important ingredient of
hope.)
Kim Basinger – This movie star has agoraphobia (fear of wide open spaces) but she
has learned to take control of her fears.
Choices:  Selecting  Strategy
Knowing Yourself
Getting in tune with yourself means reaching a deep understanding of yourself. You get to
know others by listening to them and talking to them. This is how you get to know yourself
too. “Tuning out” may take place sometime during childhood when total dependency on
adults forces you to make concessions and follow your parents’ way rather than your
own.
Setting up a constant dialogue with yourself can put you in touch with your innermost
feelings and give you reassurance. You can read your own rhythms knowing when it is time
to make firm demands on yourself and when to go easy. Being on familiar terms with
yourself can lead you to a great fund of inner strength. (You will find out more about these
ideas in the section on the Master Plan for Success.)

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices245
If imagination is properly utilized it can build a stronger self-image. Picture yourself
successfully functioning in a specific situation. Mental practice can help your real life
performance when the time comes. This is especially true for situations that are
frightening. Beforehand, mentally outline the step-by-step procedure you will use. See
yourself mastering the situation and conquering your doubts and inhibitions. In time,
your positive mental image will become a reality. When you believe in yourself, your
options are unlimited.
Knowing Your World
Sensory awakening is one of the avenues for greater awareness. Your connection to
your environment is through the senses. Unfortunately, much of the time your senses
are either dulled or muffled because of inactivity. Your life becomes a smooth mindless
connection of one routine habit to another. Much of the time your reactions are
automatic; you give little attention or awareness to your rich environment. Under these
circumstances you deny yourself full expression of your inner thoughts and feelings.
Make a deliberate decision to be more in touch with your world by saying,
“I will discover new details about this experience that I have ignored previously.”
“I will be more alert and more observant.”
The Master Plan for Success
You can create the state of mind you want that
will lead you to success. First, you have to look
at life as a great tug-of-war between what you
picture as desirable (green light) and what you
picture as obstacles or resistance (red light). The
illustration which follows shows your positive
thoughts are on a horizontal plane. Your negative
thoughts are opposing forces that you encounter
on the same horizontal plane. In order for you to
make headway as positive and negative thoughts
battle back and forth, you must rise above this
conflict and take an overview of what life is all
about. You balance what is happening between
the two opposing forces by searching for the
right insights and the right feelings to move
forward with the best choices.
Let’s look at this concept of mastery by comparing it to two weather systems. Warm air
is moving along the ground from one direction (desires); cold air is moving along the
ground from an opposite direction (resistance). To get a good perspective on what is
happening, you take an aerial view (you focus on the situation from above, surveying
all sides). Compare it to the jet stream in meteorological terms which means air currents
that are many miles above the turmoil that is happening below. Why is it important to

246Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
State of Mind
Intuition
Inspiration
Dynamic Energy
Negative Thoughts
resistance
reality
fear of failure
Positive Thoughts
desires
dreams
wishes
good feelings
more aware, insightful
more creative, intelligent
search for a balanced, serene perspective? Well, if we get carried away with the positive
side, we may blunder forward with unrealistic expectations about what can be done.
We totally disregard the negative elements that are a natural part of life. On the other
hand, if we get bogged down with the negative side, we may become too immersed in
the barriers that hamper a project. Then we become so overwhelmed with what can go
wrong, that we don’t even begin. If you focus too much on either the positive or the
negative perspective, you distort reality.
Look above the push-pull dynamics that are happening around you and retreat to higher
ground where you can survey the scene in a calm state of mind. The lessons you learn from
your bird’s eye view will allow you to think differently. The key question to ask yourself
which will help you reach the vertical plane is: “What is the worthy thing to do?” The
aerial view gives you wisdom. Your mind is receptive to new and creative possibilities.
Postpone your important thinking until you are in a high state of mind. Stop turning
problems over and over in your mind. Relax and the right solutions will come to you.
You’ll be able to see lessons you need to learn and see what you need to do next.
Be aware that the creation of your self is a process that involves changing and growing. It is
not a finished product, set in stone. Therefore, don’t become fixated or hung up on one
experience. For example, don’t become so carried away with one of your past
accomplishments that you neglect to move on. Or, don’t become so distressed by one of

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices247
positive  addiction
–  being  committed
to  positive
beneficial  habits
your past mistakes that you are terrified to try something new. Through repetition of
thoughts, you learn failure by heart. If you continue to disregard your negative thoughts
and look for good feelings, you’ll start to develop a natural tendency towards
happiness. Your bad feelings have no life of their own. When you think about bad
situations and bad thoughts continually, you nurture their existence.
At any moment, you can break down the barriers you have erected which have prevented
you from making progress in your life. You may be blindly following one of the useless rules
you created for yourself. For example I cannot do math, or I cannot lose weight, or I cannot
master a computer. Suddenly, you see that you made up that rule in the first place so you
can disregard it if you choose to do so. When you ignore self-imposed barriers, they begin
to dissolve and you will be successful.
Positive Addiction
William Glasser has devoted an entire book to the description of the unique phenomenon
known as positive addiction. We can readily offer examples of negative addiction to
cigarettes, excessive food, alcohol, and drugs. Positive addiction is a compulsion to engage
in a beneficial habit. The two main categories of positive addiction (also commonly
abbreviated PA) are mental and physical. For example, mental PA would be some activity
like meditation. Physical PA would include activities like running, walking, bicycling,
exercising, and others.
In his book, Positive Addiction, William Glasser outlined six criteria of PA. A brief
examination of them might give you a better understanding of the concept.
•   PA activities are noncompetitive in nature. They usually require about an hour of time
daily which is certainly not a big sacrifice.
•   PA activities are easy to do. They do not require intricate skills.
•   PA activities are done alone. True PA does not belong in a group setting because the
individual is focusing on the self. The group can distract you from your goals.
•   PA activities are geared to natural, spontaneous self-improvement. PA is like insight; it
comes to you out of the blue. You cannot consciously decide you will have PA.
•   PA activities are undertaken without self-criticism. Any criticism must be carefully
directed at those parts of the PA activity that it is possible to correct. However,
during PA the individual must learn to accept themselves completely so that
criticism and competition are avoided.
•   PA activities are personally of great value. An individual must have a firm belief
in this idea and, in turn, the PA activity will give the individual a feeling of
enjoyment they will learn to crave.
•   Personal initiative is very important to reach PA. You must make a firm
commitment to yourself and follow it through.

248Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
The PA activity itself may be physically
strenuous and demanding, but it sets off a
mechanism allowing the individual to “spin
free in their mind”, entering a trance-like or
transcendental mental state that accompanies
the addicting exercise. This is the whole key
to positive addiction. The special PA pleasure
becomes linked to one specific activity which
cannot be easily substituted. For example, if a
PA runner sustains afoot injury, he or she may
bicycle daily until running can be resumed.
But it won’t be as satisfying as running.
Once the PA activity is started, it usually takes
at least six months to reach the PA state where
the mind engages in that special process of
heightened awareness. Some people never
experience the PA state or may enter it only
rarely, but the physical part of the PA exercise
will be beneficial nonetheless.
What are some of the personal benefits derived from positive addiction? First, positive
addiction increases mental strength. When the individual reaches complete mental freedom
through PA, new alternatives and options for solving problems seem easier to find. Most of
the time you are consciously directing your mind toward one problem or another. In the PA
state, your mind can grow and explore in uninhibited ways because it has been freed from
the regular channels of thought. Mental alertness increases as does your self-awareness,
enabling you to know yourself more completely.
An overall feeling of both physical and mental well being is noticed. Your confidence and
self-control is improved. PA will enable you to shed bad habits, for you realize these habits
will interfere with the pleasure you get from PA. Greater emotional control is another
usual benefit. Because you can enjoy a very complete rest, less sleep is required. Most
PA individuals report a healthy weight loss and a great deal more energy for their daily
tasks. For all those reasons, positive addiction is an extremely beneficial experience.
Finding a State of Calmness
When we are too tense or too excited, we are not effective problem solvers. The thought
channels of your mind are most productive and creative when in a state of calm. Worry and
fear are two natural enemies of peace of mind. Expressing your fears to someone close to
you is an ideal way to dissolve them. We acquire the habit of worrying, but since it is an
acquired habit, it can be eliminated. Every problem has a solution and therefore it is

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices249
conquerable. A useful aid to problem solving is to list all the facts on paper—both good
and bad because there are always two sides to every problem. Then relax and gain
insights into the right choices for you to make.
Use each life experience as a means of learning, rather than an end in itself. Learning is an
ongoing process, not a finished product. See failure as a step to learning. Decide to master
something that is out of character for you. You have your own separate learning curve for
each activity you undertake. Realize that anything you are unwilling to learn will haunt you
until you master it. Don’t see your classmates or coworkers as rivals or critics but rather as
resources; they are allies, not enemies.
Start the day right by relaxing in bed a few minutes before you begin your morning routine.
Deliberately bring positive thoughts to your conscious mind. Practice imagery to focus on
your goals. For example, imagine yourself successfully doing a project that has special
meaning to you. Include in your life certain activities that bring you contentment and act as
“spiritual tranquillizers”. What do you do to put yourself in a completely relaxed mood?
Your chosen outlet will be unique to you.
Choosing a Philosophy
We have used many quotations throughout the lesson. Develop a philosophy of life that will
help you during the difficult times.
Here are some more good examples:
“No one can make us feel inferior without our consent.”
Eleanor Roosevelt
“We can choose to look upon life as a series of trials and tribulations, or we can
choose to look upon life as an accumulation of treasures.”
George Bernard Shaw
Oprah Winfrey – She is one of the highest paid television personalities with her own
daily show. She was born to a single mother. Several times in her childhood she was
sexually abused.

250Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
Choices:  Selecting  Goals
The first thing to determine is precisely what you want. Ask yourself, “Where am I headed?”
“What is my goal?” It is vital that you know exactly what you want; you must have a fixed
idea before you’ll obtain what you are after.
People who have unclear goals and unclear pictures of themselves make unclear choices.
They end up with an unclear future. This process of consciously thinking clearly through
each and every choice you make is closely related to the concept of creating more energy
by awakening your attention and focusing your goals.
For some, growth is not a linear process but occurs in a cycle. The growth cycle involves
setting a goal, conceiving a plan of action to meet the goal, and mobilizing personal
resources to achieve the goal. Often failure in reaching a goal will set off the mechanism for
a new cycle to begin. Therefore, failure is not necessarily a bad thing, is it?
Presenting new challenges to a person will encourage growth, although ultimately he or she
must accept the opportunities for self growth. The signal to grow is felt when a person’s
beliefs, concepts, and expectations are in a state of disequilibrium. That is, some sort of
disturbance or upset is experienced regarding goals. When goals produce feelings of guilt,
anxiety, depression, or boredom, one can be assured that the time is ripe to press forward
in search of new goals through growth. When we satisfy long sought goals and don’t get the
same degree of pleasure we anticipated, perhaps we have changed in the interim between
the time we set the goals and reached their fulfillment. This situation is healthy in itself.
Growth means setting goals (both long term and immediate), reviewing goals, modifying
goals, and sometimes even abandoning goals for the prospects of better ones. Periodically
review the goals you consider worthwhile for your own growth. Sort through your goals like
you sort through your closet from time to time. Any goal that is outdated does not deserve
your continued support.
Our number one need is to be liked by others. We must change our focus to finding
approval within ourselves by attaining personal excellence which means being buoyed
up by even minor improvements in a variety of tasks. That will give us a sense of
achievement. Start with small goals and eventually mastery will increase on many
bases. Some people make it a plan to start something new (a new activity for them) at
least once a week. Life is full of fresh, new starts.
You probably haven’t considered the great multitude of choices that are presented to you
every day. To get you thinking about it, let’s look at some possibilities. There are two clear
categories here, choices of attitude and choices of action. Your feelings at any given moment
are always determined or influenced by how you choose to feel at any given moment.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices251
Here are some of the thousands of choices you have:
Who you spend most of your time with
How you comb your hair
What your favourite foods are
How often you phone home
The books you read
Your hobbies
How much you exercise
Whether you argue more than you should
How well you listen to others
Whether you gossip
Whether you are a leader or a follower
How organized you are
Who you admire most
How often you are late for something
How interested you are in other people
How calm you are
Whether you give free advice
How you spend your holidays
How important you feel you are
How often you feel sorry for yourself
How much patience you have
What gets you angry
How often you criticize
How much encouragement you give to others
What you do when someone else has made a mistake
What you think about just before you go to sleep at night
All of those are choices. How we handle each of those kinds of choices plays an
unbelievably important role in how well we get through each day. Many of those choices
clearly create how other people treat us.
Ask yourself three questions: “How do I feel about the situation I am facing?” “How would
I like to feel about this?” “How do I choose to feel about it?” Situations are neutral, your
attitude isn’t. (Remember what was said in the section on Attitudes.)
Michael J. Fox – originally from Vancouver, he became a successful actor after
several years of unemployment. When he got his big break with his role in the
television series “Family Ties”, he was financially destitute. He didn’t have a couch,
a telephone, or even enough money to buy lunch at a fast food restaurant.

252Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
Retains
Youthfulness
Builds
Esteem
Relaxes
Body
Relieves
Body Tensions
Stimulates
Creativity
Fights
Depression
The Exercise Pill
Practising  Choices
In reviewing your life give careful consideration to all the possibilities and be selective in the
choices you make. Without some goals to direct us, we tend to drift aimlessly through life.
We must make choices that are important and satisfying to us. Growth means putting fears
and doubts aside as we define and attempt new challenges. Remember we experience
failure because of our own self doubt. What would you do if you knew you couldn’t
fail? That question can lead us to some exciting possibilities!
Before we begin to practise making choices, let’s think about nurturing the physical part of
our being. Exercise helps your body in a tremendous variety of ways which in turn helps
your mind and your emotional outlook.
“He who cannot find time to exercise will have to find time for illness.”
Lord Derby
Perhaps you have never given serious thought to the extra “bonuses” of exercise that were
just mentioned. It is easy to appreciate how exercise keeps the body agile. Exercise is
nature’s tranquillizer and antidepressant. For example, most people have experienced a
tension headache. Often exercise will help relieve the pain and reduce your general level of
anxiety without taking prescription drugs.
Many of you are saying, “I was never good at sports.” So, start with something easy but
effective, like walking. After you do that for a while, you might be ready to get into
something more strenuous. Physical activity can increase a person’s sense of power,
stimulate creativity, and boost mental performance. Getting into a group activity with a social
support system is very valuable.
Now, let’s go on to another Self Quiz to start you thinking about who you are, and later to
focus on some of the choices you can make. Once again, the self quiz is strictly for your
own benefit and enlightenment. You are not expected to share it with anyone unless you
choose to do so.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices253
SELF  QUIZ
Part A — Overview
Think about these important questions that may give you some insight into the person you
are today. As you did for the first quiz, you may want to write down ideas for yourself on
loose leaf paper.
1.Who would you like to be if you weren’t yourself?
2.If you only had to work part-time, what would you do with the remainder of your
time?
3.What do you like most about yourself?
4.What is your most secret enjoyment?

254Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
5.What kind of person do you find most attractive?
6.When you meet people for the first time, what would you like them to think about
you?
7.Looking back over the past five years, list two events or occasions you were
personally involved in that gave you the most pleasure.
Part B — Choices
Keep this section as your own personal record of the choices you are making today from
your present perspective. Review it from time to time to see if any of your decisions have
changed. A few samples have been done here and there. The purpose of the examples
is to give you an idea of how to approach the task, not to influence what you decide for
yourself.
1.The way I choose to relate to family members is

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices255
2.The way I choose to treat my friends is
3.The way I choose to approach my daily work tasks is
I totally immerse myself in my duties and demand perfection.
I am committed to my duties but they don’t interfere with other priorities.
4.The choice I make for my career is
5.The alternate choice I have in mind for a career is
6.The ways I choose to care for my body are
I mainly make healthy choices for meals and exercise regularly.
Most of the time I eat healthy foods, but I eat tasty junk food too; I exercise
sporadically.

256Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
7.The decisions I make regarding my appearance are
8.The way I choose to manage money is
9.The choices I make about the kind of person I am are
I like to clown around and look at the lighter side of life.
I like to be serious, cautious, and dedicated.
I like to be fun-loving and party because we only have one life to live.
10.The ways I choose to offer support to others are
11.The special choices I make to ensure that each day is special are
Larry King – He has his own successful talk show and interviews all kinds of
celebrities and world leaders. His high school marks were a very low average. He
was working at a Miami radio station as a caretaker when he got his first big break
in the media industry.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices257
Choices:  Meaningful  Relationships
“No man is an island.”
John Donne
As a social being you have a constant interest in the quality and breadth of your relationships
with others. Friendship is impossible without inner confidence beginning with your attitude
toward the self. A true assessment of one’s self logically precedes a meaningful relationship
with others.
Some people are not only interested in establishing friendships but are concerned about
popularity as well. It is important to remember that one will never attain popularity by
consciously striving for it. Here are some of the ways popularity will come to you. First, you
must project a sense of comfortableness with others, putting others at ease when they are
with you. Show a sincere interest in others without being egotistical yourself. Dale Carnegie
once said that in two months a person can launch more friendships by being interested in
others than a person can in two years by parading their own interests.
Friendship is a Smooth Connection with Someone Else
The main theme of the social attraction hypothesis (regarding friendship) is that your
behaviour toward others will be governed by the way you perceive how others feel about
you. For example, you have formed the idea that an acquaintance is an unfriendly snob. You
treat that person in a cool manner and expect them to be aloof. Your acquaintance reflects
back to you those feelings you initially believed were true. People with an inferiority
complex or those who are conceited have difficulty making friends because the initial
contact begins on a negative foundation.

258Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
Anytime we have different personalities living or working together, there will be
conflict. These techniques will help to constructively resolve emotionally charged
situations.
•First, figure out why the person is behaving this way. Ask yourself, “How would I
feel?” so you can image how this situation would be personally.
•If something has gone wrong, don’t explain what happened because that often comes
across as an excuse. Say, “you’re right”, apologize, and offer to take action.
•If you are puzzled by the argument ask, “What do you mean?” Then listen actively.
Repeat what the other person said to clarify meaning.
•When arguments start, say, “Let’s not argue. What can we do to resolve it?”
These strategies may make a world of difference in your relationships with both friends and
family.
Final  Reminders  –  Lessons  of  Life
In closing, remember these ideas to enhance your self growth.
•   Accept yourself as you are. Acknowledge your differences. Rely on your own
judgement rather than planning your life around the acceptance of others.
•   No one can diminish your self-esteem unless you let that happen.
•   Remember your right to personal happiness which comes from within.
•   Encourage spontaneity in your life.
•   Meet problems decisively; relax when they are over.
•   Don’t pass up an opportunity to tell people you care about them.
•   Be pleasant in your conversations and behaviour. If you are having a bad day, don’t
make others suffer too.
•   Put every effort you can into the present moment to make it emotionally
successful.
•   Establish a healthy balance in your life. Be realistic but also keep self-critical thoughts
in their place.
•   Don’t be afraid to try something you think you can’t do. Life is full of surprises!
•   Live each day fully. Enjoy life today; yesterday is gone and tomorrow may never
come. Be grateful for good health, it is the cornerstone of happiness more than wealth
or achievements.
•   Laughing at your worries reduces their threat to you. Tell your problems to people
you trust. Friends offer a valuable network of support.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices259
•Love yourself first and most.
•   Hang onto your dreams. Personal excellence buoys up your spirits and increases
your confidence.
Kevin Costner – He is a very successful movie star and director. Two of his well
known movies are “Dances with Wolves” and “Water World”. After college, he quit
his first job with a marketing firm and was unemployed for six months. Then, for
another six months, he worked in the movies as a stage hand until he got his big
break.
Hope
The word hope is just a pleasant word we occasionally inject into our language to suggest
we are having positive thoughts about something. Hope is nice, meek, vaguely assuring, and
good. But is that all there is to it?
Some psychologists, medical personnel, caregivers, families of critically ill patients, and
victims have used hope. People experiencing overpowering tragedies have used the
intangible, “wispy” element of hope to pull them through some of the most physically
challenging and emotionally draining experiences one can imagine. It has been discovered
that hope is the key ingredient that lifts the human spirit through the dark passages of illness,
financial disasters, and personal family distresses. People who are able to contemplate hope
are better prepared to set goals and negotiate the difficulties that attack their well-being.
In the beginning, hope is something that is as personal as one’s DNA classification. You can
hope with others but you cannot impose, encourage, or cajole anyone else to hope. Hope is
a very personal decision that is made by each individual. It is a determination to survive and
to be involved in life. Meeting each new day and each new experience or challenge with
hope means being involved in all dimensions of our existence—physically, emotionally and
spiritually. One of the secondary qualities of hope is a concern for others besides the
self.
Hope can change lives. When asked about the psychological factors involved in conquering
cancer, over 90% of oncologists rated hope as the most important factor. Science has
confirmed its importance in fighting and managing illness.
Hope creates a whole new way of thinking about life. It carries with it a new set of
definitions and concepts. Hope requires a lot of trust that is created when people reach out
to others. There are special stories about hope that people must listen to carefully and
appreciate. For example, one man was very seriously injured in a farm accident. The
only thing that kept up his spirits and pulled him through this agony was singing gospel
songs over and over.

260Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
Hope has many special symbols in our society. For example, a cross is a symbol of
Hope for the Christian religion; the daffodil is a symbol of Hope for the Cancer
Society; the dove is a symbol of Hope for peace; the rainbow is a symbol of Hope that
God will not bring another flood to the earth. Sometimes music inspires people to hope
by the beautiful melody and the words of the song. Our dreams can provide visions of
hope. Certain rituals performed in religious ceremonies or by families watching over
someone who is critically ill can bring comfort and hope.
Hope models are people who exemplify hope. Hope models are not necessarily people
who are bright, successful, or spiritual. Hope models can be young, innocent children, or
even a pet that offers comfort. Hope bridges are experiences from our past that put us on a
higher plane and take us to the future where there is promise of a better day. Where have
you found hope in your life?
Exploring Career-Related Abilities, Interests, Skills, And Values
Before you make a major decision about your career and academic goals, it is important to
know yourself so that you make realistic choices. People often suffer from career
confusion because they do not know the depth and scope of your capacities and
interests so that they can be measured against the requirements of various careers.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices261
Abilities
These describe the things at which you are good at and which come easily to you. Abilities
can be intellectual as well as musical, artistic, and/or mechanical. Your intellectual capacity is
constantly being measured by tests, assignments, and final examinations. Realistically, you
need to look at these and see whether they measure up to the requirements needed for your
career. If your marks do not match the minimum requirement for your career choice, then it
is a good idea to look at another career choice, perhaps in the same area but with lower
requirements. For example, if you wanted to become a psychologist, you would need
certain marks in your Bachelor of Arts (BA) to get you into graduate school. If you don’t
have the marks, then look at another field like human resources or corrections work where
the academic requirements are not as high.
Interests
Make sure you choose a career that matches well with your interests, Sometimes people
are good at something but don’t really enjoy doing it. People are more likely to be satisfied
with their jobs if they are allowed to do the things they like.
One way of doing this is to write down how you spend your leisure time. Do you read,
practice the piano, surf the net, work on old cars, or do volunteer work at a children’s
shelter? Another way is to think about long-standing interests. Have you always been drawn
to animals, old people, history, or music?
Skills
Skills are specific abilities. You may have good communication skills, good people skills,
good research skills. You can also improve skills with practice and learn new ones.
Values
As you choose a career path, it is important that you choose a path that does not come into
conflict with your own personal values – those things individuals believe are desirable or
good. Some people place a high value on integrity, others value security, independence,
power, adventure, or love. Often values are deeply held, and it is very painful for an
individual if work causes major value conflicts.

262Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
Entry-Level  Jobs  For  Psychology  Majors
Although you need a masters or a doctoral degree to be a ‘psychologist’ there are many
entry-level jobs that are open to people with a bachelor’s degree in psychology. An
entry level job is the job you find that starts your career. The types of entry-level jobs
for psychology graduates are those that use people skills. For example, communicating
with and relating to people from diverse backgrounds is often required by case workers,
sales, marketing, personnel, and management positions. Some entry-level jobs need
analytical skills which are useful in the work place because they give the necessary
skills for problem solving. Other skill areas include writing which is useful for logically
developed written reports and research which can involve using statistical tables and
graphs to analyze problems and to communicate relevant findings.
These skills acquired at the undergraduate level, can be used in a variety of work
settings including human services (counselling, social work), business, criminal justice
(probation officer, corrections officer), health and recreation, and education.
Entry Level Positions
Obtained by Psychology
Majors
Advertising trainee
Administrative assistant
Advertising agent
Airline Reservations clerk
Claims specialist
Customer relations
Employee counsellor
Employment counsellor
Insurance agent
Job analyst
Loan officer
Management trainee
Marketing representative
Marketing researcher
Media buyer
Occupational analyst
Personnel worker
Public information officer
Public relations
Sales representatives
Small business owner
Store manager
Staff training
Staff development
Warehouse manager
Mental Health/Social
Services Area
Behaviour analyst
Case worker
Child protection worker
Corrections officer
Counsellor aide
Day care centre supervisor
Director of volunteers
Drug/substance counsellor
Employment counsellor
Family service worker
Group home coordinator
Disabilities counsellor
Probation/parole officer
Program manager
Rehabilitation advisor
Residential youth counsellor
Social service director
Veteran’s advisor
Other Positions
Affirmative action officer
Child care worker
College admissions officer
Recreation worker
Relations officer
Fast food manager
Hospital representative
Newspaper reporter
Parks director
Recreation director
Statistical assistant
Technical writer

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices263
Mental Health/Social Services area – psychology major combined with a minor in
sociology, family and child studies, criminology, or health studies
Other positions – attained by people who have majored in psychology and have a minor in
another field
Types  Of  Jobs  Available  For  Those  With  A  Master’s  And/Or  A  PhD
In  Psychology
Teaching  and  research
People who teach undergraduate, master’s level, or doctoral-level students usually work in
a university setting. Most people who teach at the university level are also involved in
research. If you don’t want to teach and only want to focus on research, then you can work
for various government agencies or private research organizations. To work as a
psychologist in any of these settings, you most likely will need a Ph.D in psychology. You
might be able to get a job teaching psychology courses at a community college with a
Master’s degree in psychology.
Applied  work
Psychologists, depending on their specialty area, are able to work in different fields . They
can teach and share their knowledge, research and generate new knowledge, and they can
also work in fields where they can apply their knowledge. These areas include clinical
psychology, counselling psychology, forensic psychology, health psychology, industrial/
organizational psychology, and sports psychology.
•   Clinical psychology
People with  psychological problems are assessed and treated by clinical
psychologists. Some psychologists act as therapists for people who experience
normal psychological crises like the death of a close family member. Psychologists can
be generalists who treat patients from a wide variety of the population or they can be
specialists who work with specific groups like children,  women, or the elderly.
Usually, clinical psychologists work in universities, hospitals, community health
centres, or they are in private practice.
•   Counselling psychology
Counselling psychologists tend to concentrate more on a person’s adjustment
problems instead of working with people who suffer from severe psychological
disorders. They are found at universities, counselling centres, community mental health
clinics, and in private practice.

264Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
•   Forensic psychology
Forensic psychologists are found in many places including prisons and associated
facilities like halfway houses, working as consultants for trial lawyers, serving as
expert witness in jury trials, or formulating public policy on psychology and the law.
Some forensic psychologists have both psychology and legal qualifications.
•   Health psychology
Health psychologists work  for the promotion and maintenance of  good health and
the prevention and treatment of illness. They can design and run programs that help
individuals lose weight, stop smoking, manage stress, and stay fit. Health
psychologists work in hospitals, medical schools, rehabilitation centres, public health
clinics, university settings, as well as private practice.
•   Industrial/organizational psychology
Often called I/O psychologists, they are interested in the relationship between people
and their work environment. They can develop new ways to increase workplace
productivity or help in personnel selection. I/O psychologists work in business,
government agencies, and academic institutions.
•   Sports psychology
Sports psychologists deal with the psychological factors that improve athletic
performance. Some look at the effects of exercise and physical activity on
psychological adjustment and health. Sports psychologists work in academic
institutions and/or are consultants for sports teams.
A sports psychology consultant currently working in the field suggests that there are
three areas of specialization:
•   Educational sports psychology: This emphasizes teaching performance-
enhancement skills such as goal setting, focusing, imagery, and arousal control in
an athletic environment.
•   Clinical sports psychology: This deals with sports-related psychological problems
such as depression, substance abuse, and eating disorders among athletes.
•   Academic sports psychology: The focus in this area is on research and teaching.
In the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta, Georgia, there were over 20
sports psychology consultants working with the athletes. One-third of the golfers
on major tours work with a sports psychologist. Until recently, a sports
psychologist was considered by athletes as a person you went to see when
you had a problem. Now, sports psychologists are viewed as an integral part
of many athletes’ lives as their mental health is viewed as just as important as
their physical health.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices265
Education
There are many counselling related career options in the educational field. If you plan to
work in a public school setting, you must also have an education degree.
•   Educational psychology
Those involved in this field try to understand the basic aspects of human learning and
develop materials and strategies that help the learning process. An educational
psychologist might study the reading process and then develop a new technique to
teach reading to those who cannot learn in the traditional classroom setting.
Educational psychologists are trained in faculties of education not psychology. They
are found working in universities and colleges as well as at the school board level.
•   School counselling
School counsellors work with children who are troubled. They try and help these
children function more effectively with their classmates and their teachers. They
also help children deal with family problems. School counsellors are employed at
all levels of the educational system.
•   School psychologists
If a child is having difficulties in school, the school psychologists is called in to
test the child. They try and diagnose the problem and sometimes suggest ways of
dealing with the problem.
School psychologists are usually trained in facilities of education and work in the
public education system.
Social  work
If you are interested in counselling, you may want to consider social work. Social
workers who practice psychotherapy are called clinical social workers or psychiatric
social workers. Clinical social workers assess and treat psychological problems.
Psychiatric social workers help individuals, families, and small groups. Both can be
found in mental health centres, counselling centres, sheltered workshops, hospitals, and
schools. Some have their own private practices.

266Section Four: Making ChoicesGeneral Psychology 20
INTERNET
Supplemental  information
If you would like to learn more about careers, these web sites have a great deal of
information.
Discovering your personality: http://www.advisorteam.com/user/ktsintro.asp
The most adventurous careers in the 21
st
 century
http://library.thinkquest.org/3340/INDEX2.HTM
The next step magazine (a magazine for US high school students, but it has a Canadian
component): 
http://www.nextstepmagazine.com/
Career finder (you have to register) http://www.cdn.cx.bridges.com
Summary
To summarize:
•   Motivation may be intrinsic indicating that the person is attracted to the
task by involvement and interest in the work itself.
•   Motivation may be extrinsic indicating that the person is attracted to the
task by external rewards.
•   People must take responsibility for their own choices.
•   The element of time we choose as the focus of our life is important. It is
natural to think about past experiences and dream about the future, but it is
necessary to be anchored in the present.
•   The self-fulfilling prophecy occurs when we have strong beliefs and our
actions lead us in directions that make these beliefs come true.
•   It is essential that we review our self-image to make sure it is positive
leading us to positive experiences.
•   Positive addiction (PA) means engaging in a beneficial habit to the degree
that it becomes a necessary part of one’s lifestyle.
•   Choose your thoughts carefully because finding a positive state of mind is
a powerful technique for success.
•   Develop a good philosophy of life that works for you.
•   Sensory awakening means learning to savour the vivid impressions and
the details of our experiences instead of going through life on “automatic
pilot”.

General Psychology 20Section Four: Making Choices267
A
•   Meaningful relationships are established when you take a position of
empathy with the other person; apologize for problems and correct them;
do not assume what has gone wrong but ask the person about it directly.
•   Hope is a choice to survive and become involved in life. Hope brings people
through many crises in their lives including serious illness.
•   Only people with PhDs in psychology can call themselves psychologists.
•   Make sure you are aware of your own abilities, interests, skills, and values
prior to choosing a career.
•   There are many jobs that require a psychology major (having the majority of
your post-secondary courses are in psychology). Psychology courses can be
combined with other courses to make you eligible for many employment
opportunities.
•   If you have a master’s or a doctoral degree in psychology, there are teaching
and research careers as well as jobs in applied psychology and education.
Turn to Assignment Booklet 8 and complete the assignments for this lesson.



Glossary



ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Glossary
271271
271271
271
GG
GG
G
LOSSARYLOSSARY
LOSSARYLOSSARY
LOSSARY
abreaction ñ expression of repressed
feelings and emotional pain through
verbal responses
abstract concepts ñ ideas about objects,
relationships, and structures
achieved role ñ a position given on the
basis of merit and competence
advanced organizer ñ information
presented before the main content which
serves as an anchor for the new ideas
which follow
affective learning ñ gaining an
understanding about feelings and
emotions
alcohol psychosis ñ a type of organic
psychosis that occurs when a person is
addicted to alcohol
Alzheimerís ñ progressive degeneration
of the brain resulting in loss of memory,
mental powers, and physical
coordination
amnesia ñ loss of memory due to physical
or psychological factors
androgyny ñ combining both male and
female traits and capabilities
anhedonia ñ the inability to experience
pleasure
anorexia nervosa ñ a severe eating
disorder characterized by a refusal to eat
which results in the person becoming
extremely thin
anxiety ñ a general state of fear, dread,
or uneasiness
approach-approach ñ a situation that has
two alternative choices which are both
positive
approach-avoidance ñ a situation that
has a combination of positive and
negative alternatives
approach gradient ñ the closer one is to
an attractive goal, the stronger is the pull
toward the goal
arbitrary ñ random, changing, varying
ascribed role ñ a position given
automatically at birth
ataractics ñ drugs used in the treatment
of mental disorders
attention deficit disorder (ADD) ñ poor
attention span, inability to concentrate
on data for any length of time,
accompanied by fidgeting, restlessness
autism ñ a neurological disorder
affecting communication and social
interaction with others

272272
272272
2 7 2GlossaryADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
autobiographical memory ñ the personal
memories you have of your life
autocratic leader ñ the head of the group
who governs with a dictatorial style
avoidance-avoidance ñ a situation that
has two alternative choices which are
both  negative
avoidance gradient ñ the closer one is to
a negative or frightening situation, the
stronger is the pull to get away from the
situation
behaviourism ñ the psychological
approach to the study of human nature
which emphasizes the accurate, objective
study of outward behaviour
brainwashing (mind control) ñ altering
an individualís original personality and
beliefs by imposing strict environmental
controls and then substituting a new
system of basic beliefs
bulimia ñan eating disorder marked by
eating binges alternating with purging
(or getting rid of consumed food through
vomiting laxatives or excessive
exercising)
bullies ñ aggressive, overpowering,
intimidating people
catatonic schizophrenia ñ the body reacts
to psychosis by freezing in various poses
catatoxic ñ a response which takes an
aggressive approach to handling stress
catharsis ñ releasing emotional tensions
by openly discussing problems
cautious shift hypothesis ñ group
decisions are more conservative than an
individual acting alone
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome ñ a condition
of severe fatigue, immune defects, fever,
chills, muscle pain, and depression
classical conditioning ñ pairing an
unconditioned stimulus with a new
stimulus until this conditioned stimulus
elicits the given response
clique ñ a group structured around class
lines with strict control over its members
cognition ñ knowing, understanding,
being conscious of
cognitive learning ñ thinking, problem
solving, and processing information in
creative ways
compensation ñ making up for
shortcomings in one area by focusing on
another area
complete reinforcement ñ when a correct
response is made, reinforcement is given
each and every time
compulsions ñ actions that result from a
strong, persistent urge to engage in a
particular behaviour
concept formation ñ building a system of
ideas about concrete objects or abstract
ideas
conditioned response (CR) ñ a new or
acquired response elicited by a stimulus
that has been introduced through a
learning situation

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Glossary
273273
273273
273
conditioned stimulus (CS) ñ a new
stimulus that becomes effective in the
conditioning process through learning
conditioning ñ learning a particular
response when a stimulus is presented
consciousness ñ awareness of some
element of the surroundings
conversion hysteria ñ physical symptoms
develop when energy behind a repressed
emotion upsets the smooth functioning of
a body organ
corpus callosum ñ the nerve tissue that
connect, both hemispheres of the brain
counter conditioning ñ replacing a
conditioned response to a particular
stimulus with a different response
crowd ñ a flexible gathering of people
with common goals and purposes
deductive reasoning ñ the process of
beginning with a general understanding
or general principle and applying it to
specific cases to see if it holds true
defense mechanisms ñ a behaviour
response to conflict or frustration which
gives the individual some protection
delusions ñ false beliefs based on
inaccurate ideas
dementia ñ a group of diseases of the
brain characterized by loss of intellectual
abilities (memory, thinking skills),
personality changes, and deterioration of
physical coordination
democratic leader ñ the head of the
group who respects the rights of the
members and encourages them to
assume responsibility
denial ñ refusing to admit or
acknowledge a painful experience
depression ñ a lingering mood of sadness,
pessimism, hopelessness, anxiety; a deep
gloom which causes a disruption in
mental and physical activities
desensitization ñ a method of reducing
fears by gradually introducing the person
to situations or objects connected with
their fears
deviant ñ a person who displays
inappropriate behaviour
diminishing returns ñ extra study time
does not produce extra gains in learning
displaced aggression ñ transferring
hostility from the original source of
frustration to a person or object not
directly associated with it
dissociation ñ a neurotic reaction to
extreme stress which disrupts the normal
association of thoughts, memories, and
behaviour
distributed practice ñ learning sessions
separated by rest periods
dyslexia ñ reading disability that affects
all language skills such as reading,
writing, speaking, and listening

274274
274274
2 7 4GlossaryGeneral  Psychology  20
eclectic approach – an approach that
in
volves selecting what is perceived to be
the best ideas and doctrines from a
variety of services
eclectic view – a psychological theory
built on ideas fr
om a number of different
theories
ego – the part of the personality that acts
as the mediator between the id, super
ego,
and external reality
electroconvulsive shock (ECT) –
tr
eatment of a mental condition by
sending a shock through the brain
excited phase – the stage of catatonia
marked by constant motion and
continual  talking
exclusive group – the group’s aim is to
limit membership
explicit behaviour – overt behaviour, or
an individual’
s responses that can easily
be observed and measured
extended kinship – all the relatives
outside the cir
cle of the immediate family
external locus of control – a belief that
one is contr
olled by outside factors
extinction – elimination of conditioned
r
esponse by continually withholding
reinforcement
extravert – a person who is self-
confident, people-oriented, outgoing
extrinsic motivation – the urge to do
something based on the pr
omise of an
external reward
faradic stimulation – a mild version of
ECT
flooding – a method of treating fears by
forcing the person to confront their fears
immediately
formal leader – an individual who is in
an established position of authority in the
hierar
chy
formal learning – gathering information
thr
ough school studies and other
structured lectures
free association – a psychological
technique wher
e the person “talks out”
problems with the therapist
fugue – amnesia involving running away
fr
om one’s familiar surroundings
functional fixedness – the inability to see
new or unique uses for familiar objects
functional psychosis – behavioural
disor
ders caused by disruptive
environmental  factors
fusion – integrating or bringing together
all parts of the personality
gender identity – the person establishes if
they ar
e male or female
generalization – grouping of similar
experiences (The individual responds to
them all in the same way.)
generation gap – having different values,
ideas, and perspectives than people who
ar
e older or younger

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Glossary
275275
275275
275
group morale ñ the attitude of group
members and willingness to work toward
group goals
group therapy ñ the treatment of
behavioural disorders with talk-sessions
and support of the group
hallucinations ñ false sense perceptions
based on inaccurate feedback from the
senses
hierarchy ñ the power structure of the
group
hemisphere ñ a major section of the
brain-right and left side
hypnosis ñ a deeply relaxed, drowsy state
of mind in which the person is open to
suggestions
hypochondriac ñ a person who worries
about a number of illnesses when there is
nothing wrong
hypothesis ñ a sophisticated hunch
adopted as a tentative explanation for a
situation which is used as the basis for
further investigation
id ñ the part of the personality which
focuses on satisfying basic needs and
receiving pleasure
implicit behaviour ñ covert behaviour, or
an individualís response that cannot be
observed or that may only be measured
with special instruments
implicit speech ñ tiny muscular reactions
a person produces when thinking
inclusive group ñ group’s aim is to
expand membership and to include more
people
identification ñ adopting the behaviour
and mannerisms of someone who is
admired
inductive reasoning ñ the process of
beginning with a number of specific
cases and progressing to form a general
conclusion or observation
infer ñ to interpret data from oneís
personal point of view
informal leader ñ an individual who has
the respect of the group due to personal
attributes
informal learning ñ gathering
information through contacts with
others, leisure interests
in group ñ the group to which a person
belongs
insomnia ñ the inability to fall asleep
intensity ñ a vivid learning experience
will make a lasting impression
interaction-oriented group ñ groupís aim
to provide social contacts
interdependent ñ the connections people
have with each other
internal locus of control ñ the belief that
self determination shapes oneís destiny
intrinsic motivation ñ the urge to do
something based on natural enjoyment of
the activity

276276
276276
2 7 6GlossaryGeneral  Psychology  20
intrinsic motivation – the urge to do
something based on natural enjoyment of
the  activity
introjection – taking on the
characteristics of others to gain
acceptance  from  them
introspective – thoughtful reflection
about a personal pr
oblem
introvert – a person who is quiet,
thoughtful,  inner
-directed
laissez-faire leader – the head of the
gr
oup who prefers to avoid direct
involvement  with  the  group
latent learning – learning occuring
without full awar
eness that it is
happening
leadership-characteristics hypothesis –
individuals assume leadership because
they have the qualities that make them
good leaders
leadership-situation hypothesis –
individuals assume leadership because
they can take char
ge at the right time
learning – mastering information or
skills that incr
ease one’s competence
learning by insight – a solution is reached
when the right r
elationships are suddenly
pieced together
libido – the energy within the id that
gives attention to the goals of attaining
pleasur
e
life dream – a pathway you plan for your
life
localized – a precise area connected to a
specific function
loneliness – a feeling of yearning for the
company of others
long term memory – information is
thor
oughly learned and understood so we
may retain it over extended periods
perhaps even lifetime
manic-depression – (bipolar depression) a
condition of emotional extr
emes between
feelings of elation to feelings of despair
massed practice – learning sessions that
occur in one entir
e unit of time
maturation – development of a human
being or animal thr
ough growth and
aging controlled by internal biological
factors
medical model – the theory that mental
disor
ders are a type of disease arising
from a malfunction within the person
motor-skill memory – the body
“physically” r
emembers or automatically
responds to previously learned routines
or skills (e.g., the correct stance when
hitting a baseball)
mind mapping – illustrating a concept
with branches of ideas r
elated to it
mnemonic devices – memory aids such as
jingles or catchwor
ds
multiple personality – the person’s sense
of identity becomes fragmented into
many separate identities

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Glossary
277277
277277
277
negative reinforcement ñ removing a
negative factor that increases the
likelihood of a response
negative self-concept ñ having feelings of
inferiority and self doubt about abilities
negative transfer ñ prior learning
interferes with learning that occurs later
neuron ñ a single nerve cell; in order to
function, the neuron needs to be part of a
system of nerves
neurosis ñ a psychological disorder
characterized by anxiety, guilt and
depression
NLP ñ the study of the structure of
learning experiences which indicate how
new ideas are absorbed and stored using
the senses
non-insane automatism ñ being unaware
of committing a violent act during sleep
nonverbal communication ñ exchanging
ideas through body posture and gestures
nuclear family ñ mother, father, and
children
object constancy ñ objects continue to
exist even when they are not visible
obsessions ñ persistent, irrational
thoughts that repeatedly run through the
personís mind
operant conditioning ñ strengthening a
response by immediately presenting
reinforcement following the response
organic psychosis ñ behavioural
disorders caused by damage to the body
parts
out group ñ the people outside of oneís
group
overcompensation ñ overcoming feelings
of weakness or inferiority by putting
forth a super-human effort
overlearning ñ continued learning until
complete mastery of the material occurs
panic attack ñ a severe form of anxiety
causing a person to feel terrified and
immobilized
paranoia ñ false reasoning leading to
false conclusions about what is taking
place
partial reinforcement (intermittent) ñ
when a correct response is made,
sometimes reinforcement is given and
sometimes it is withheld
peer ñ someone of the same rank or
standing
perceptual learning ñ acquiring physical
skills
phobia ñ an excessive, irrational fear of
some object or situation that occurs in
the absence of any danger
plateau ñ a period of little or no progress
in learning
play therapy ñ observing young children
in a play situation to determine reasons
for their behavioural problems

278278
278278
2 7 8GlossaryADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
positive addiction ñ being committed to
positive beneficial habits
positive reinforcement ñ a pleasant or
favourable factor that increases the
likelihood of a response
positive self concept ñ having a
confident, successful image of oneself
positive transfer ñ prior learning is
helpful to learning that occurs later
preconscious ñ the transition area
between the conscious and unconscious
mind
predicates ñ verbs or key words that
people choose to describe their
experiences which relate to the senses
predisposition ñ the ìbuilt inî tendency
to develop a particular behaviour
primacy effect ñ first items in the
learning sequence are remembered most
clearly
proactive inhibition ñ the theory that our
present knowledge interferes with new
knowledge we attempt to acquire
procrastination ñ putting off or delaying
a task to avoid the possibility of failure
projection ñ putting the blame on others
for oneís own shortcomings
psychoanalysis ñ a psychological theory
with accompanying treatment used to
assist people with personality disorders
psychology ñ the science of human
behaviour
psychosis ñ a serious disturbance of the
mind whereby the person loses contact
with reality
psychosocial model ñ the theory that
mental disorders are a type of disease
arising form an interaction between the
person and the social environment
psychosomatic illness ñ an illness or
unhealthy condition brought about by
emotional pressures
psychotherapy ñ using psychological
methods to treat behavioural problems
rationalization ñ justifying oneís
behaviour by giving false reasons that
are more socially acceptable than the real
reasons
reaction formation ñ taking on
characteristics or assuming behaviours
that are completely opposite to oneís true
nature
reasoning ñ forming judgements and
conclusions from facts that are available
recency effect ñ last items in the learning
sequence are remembered best
reciprocal ñ two components operate
with a balance of give and take
reference group ñ a group of people who
have similar beliefs and values
reflex ñ a response that occurs
automatically without any learning
regression ñ retreating to a less mature,
more childish level of behaviour which
seems like a safer way to meet problems

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Glossary
279279
279279
279
reinforcement ñ a process that
strengthens the possibility of a response
occurring once again
rejection ñ being abandoned or being
outside the group
REM ñ rapid eye movements a person
experiences while sleeping
repression ñ ìforgettingî unpleasant
situations by pushing them out of our
awareness
retroactive inhibition ñ the theory that
our present knowledge interferes when
we try to go back and recall previous
data
risky shift hypothesis ñ group members
will be more daring than an individual
acting alone
rites of passage ñ attaining the status of
full membership after enduring an
initiation procedure
role ñ the behaviour pattern one
assumes, or the character one plays
saturation ñ being completely full, unable
to hold any more
schizophrenia ñ a serious form of
psychosis involving loss of contact with
reality, delusions, dulling of the emotions,
hearing voices
secondary reinforcement ñ a reward that
is associated with something that fulfills
the actual need e.g. money
self actualization ñ total fulfillments as a
human being
self concept ñ the attitudes and
impressions the individual has of himself
or herself
self-fulfilling prophecy ñ a strong belief
that comes true because we make it
happen
sensory memory ñ memory pertaining to
information from one of the five senses
self-image ñ the picture or concept a
person has of himself or herself
self-mutilation ñ injuring the body as a
means of relieving severe stress and pain
serial learning ñ material is learned in a
definite order or sequence
short term memory ñ the initial entry of
information to our awareness
slashing ñ harming oneís self by inflicting
cuts
small group ñ a cohesive unit with no
more than fifteen or twenty members
socialization ñ the process of learning the
appropriate values and behaviours of the
society
social attraction hypothesis ñ our
behaviour toward others is determined
by the way we believe they feel about us
social influence ñ the way group thoughts
and behaviours change through group
contacts
social norms ñ group defined standards
for acceptable and unacceptable
behaviour

280280
280280
2 8 0GlossaryADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)
social power ñ control within the group
to bring about changes
sociogram ñ a chart showing the pattern
of friendships in a group
sociometry ñ the study of how group
members relate to each other
somatotherapy ñ the treatment of mental
illness by drugs, shock therapy and
sometimes surgery
somnambulism ñ a sleep walking
disturbance
spatial orientation ñ ability to visualize
objects in relation to each other
spontaneous recovery ñ the reappearance
of conditioned response after a rest
period following extinction
status ñ position of authority and respect
stigma ñ a label of disgrace or dishonour
stress ñ a condition of strain, pressure,
tension or hardship
stress reaction ñ the response given to
control or improve a stressful situation
stressor stimuli ñ the factors which create
stress
SQ3R ñ survey, question, read, recite,
review
stimulation ñ imitation of a learning
situation very similar to a real-life one
Stockholm Syndrome ñ the process
hostages experience when they begin to
identify with their captors
stupor phase ñ the stage of catatonia
marked by rigid, immobile, and
expressionless pose
sublimation ñ channeling sexual or
aggressive energy into more socially
acceptable endeavours
superego ñ the part of the personality
which gives moral direction to the person
like the conscience
suppression ñ remaining somewhat aware
of covering up unpleasant information
symbol ñ something that represents
something else
synergy ñ the brain collects impressions
from sight, hearing, symbols and
movement
syntoxic ñ a response which focuses on
acceptance or accommodation
tabula rasa ñ the theory that a newborn
baby has no previous thoughts or
experiences prior to birth
task-oriented group ñ groupís aim is to
perform a specific job
Touretteís Syndrome ñ a compulsive
disorder involving many different motor
tics and vocal tics
transfer ñ the affect of previous learning
on later learning or performance

ADLC  General  Psychology  20  (November  2003)Glossary
281281
281281
281
trial and error ñ a learning approach
which involves trying various solutions
until the correct one is found
verbal communication ñ exchanging
ideas through the written or spoken word
verbal memory ñ memories involving
abstract data related to thoughts, ideas
unconditioned response (UCR) ñ a
response that automatically occurs with
no learning involved
unconditioned stimulus (UCS) ñ a
stimulus that automatically elicits a
response with no learning involved
unconsciousness ñ lack of awareness of
various elements of the surroundings
xenophobia ñ fear of outsiders
Zeigarnik effect ñ the theory that
incomplete tasks are remembered longer
than completed tasks
