Chapter 16  Cellular Reproduction • MHR  551
many others—including genetic 
material—appeared transparent under 
a microscope. These structures were 
impossible to differentiate, even at high 
magniﬁ cations. Although scientists 
could observe the division of cells, they 
could not infer how distinct cellular 
processes work.
 
A signiﬁ cant technological boost 
came from an unexpected source—the 
clothing industry. In the mid-1800s, the 
ﬁ rst synthetic dyes were produced. In 
1879, the German biologist Walther 
Flemming (1843–1903) used one of these 
new dyes to stain a specimen of tissue. 
The stain was picked up by a substance 
in the nucleus, which Flemming called 
chromatin (meaning “coloured matter”). 
Within a few years, Flemming had 
observed that chromatin is made up of 
a set of individual coloured structures. 
As well, he had offered the ﬁ rst accurate 
description of the cell cycle and the process 
of cell division in plant and animal cells. 
Flemming coined the word mitosis—from 
Greek, meaning “thread”—to describe 
his observations of thread-like structures 
dividing in the cell nucleus. (You will 
learn about mitosis in Section 16.2.)
 
Flemming had no idea there was 
a connection between the coloured 
substance he was studying and the 
processes of heredity. Even so, the fact 
that this substance behaved in predictable 
ways during cell division, and that its 
behaviour was similar in both plant 
and animal cells, indicated that it was 
important to the life of all cells. The 
systematic study of cell division began 
in earnest in the late 1800s.
 
Today, scientists know that the 
structure and function of a cell are 
determined by its genetic material. 
Therefore, the central feature of the cell 
cycle is the way that genetic material is 
duplicated and then passed from the 
original cell, called the parent cell, to 
each new cell, called a daughter cell. This 
process is made possible by the highly 
organized arrangement of genetic 
material within a cell. 
2
  Explain why there is a limit to 
how large a cell can grow.
2
  Deﬁ ne the term “cell cycle.”
2
  Brieﬂ y summarize how advances 
in technology led to the new 
theories about the origin of cells.
2
  What is the central feature of the 
cell cycle? 
• • •
• • •
Organization of Genetic 
Information in the 
Eukaryotic Cell
The genetic information of a cell is 
contained in its DNA (deoxyribonucleic 
acid), a molecule of nucleic acid that 
governs processes of heredity in the cells 
of organisms. DNA is found in each 
chromosome of a cell. A chromosome is a 
length of DNA and its associated proteins.
 
In eukaryotic cells, the chromosomes 
are found in the nucleus. (Eukaryotic 
cells are those that make up protists, 
fungi, plants, and animals. These cells 
have a membrane-bound nucleus.) If 
you lined up all the DNA found in the 
nucleus of a single human cell, it would 
reach about 3 m. The diameter of a 
nucleus, however, is only about 5 µm. 
(As a comparison, imagine stufﬁ ng a 
piece of string about 150 km long into 
a lunch box.) A highly organized 
arrangement of proteins, known as 
histones, and DNA compacts this 
material within the cell.
 
For most of a cell’s life cycle, its 
genetic material appears as a mass of long, 
intertwined strands known as chromatin. 
As the genetic material is reorganized 
during the processes of cellular division, 
the threads of chromatin condense and 
become visible under a light microscope 
as distinct chromosomes. Figure 16.2 
shows the levels of organization of 
genetic material within a eukaryotic 
cell. The constricted (pinched-in) region 
in the condensed chromosome is a 
specialized region called a centromere.
