554  MHR • Unit 7  Cell Division, Genetics, and Molecular Biology
• G1 phase: Early scientists could not 
identify any speciﬁ c activities taking 
place during this phase, so they called 
it “Gap 1” or “G1.” Scientists now know 
that important growth processes are 
occurring, so more recent work usually 
refers to this phase as “Growth 1.” The 
cell grows quickly during the G1 phase. 
• S phase: About midway through 
interphase, the cell’s DNA is copied 
exactly. That is, the DNA in the 
chromatin replicates to create a second 
identical set of DNA. (You will learn 
more about DNA replication in 
Chapter 18.) These two identical 
chromosomes, called sister chromatids, 
are joined at the centromere, as shown 
in Figure 16.6. Because new genetic 
material is synthesized during this 
phase, it is known as the synthesis 
or S phase.
• G2 phase: Cells that have completed 
the S phase then enter the last segment 
of interphase, called “Gap 2” or 
“Growth 2.” DNA replication in the 
S phase has consumed a great deal of 
energy, so this second growth stage lets 
the cell rebuild its reserves of energy to 
prepare for division. As well, the cell 
manufactures proteins and other 
molecules to make structures required 
for division of the nucleus and cell. 
Modelling a Karyotype
A karyotype provides information about the number 
and organization of chromosomes in an individual. 
Karyotypes are used most often by geneticists to 
determine the presence of particular genetic conditions. 
In this investigation, you will simulate the preparation 
of a karyotype and analyze your results.
Question
How can you prepare and interpret a karyotype?
  
Safety Precautions
• Use care when handling scissors.
Materials
• image of the chromosomes in a human somatic cell
• blank karyotype form
• scissors 
• tape
Procedure 
 1. Work with a partner. Your teacher will provide 
an image of chromosomes in a human somatic 
cell. Examine the chromosomes. How many 
chromosomes can you count? What similarities and 
differences can you see? Record your observations.
 2. Carefully cut out each chromosome.
 3. Match the homologous pairs of chromosomes. 
Remember to match the length, location of the 
centromere, and banding pattern of the 
chromosomes in each pair.
 4. Tape the pairs of autosomes 1 to 22 on the karyotype 
form in order, from longest to shortest. Place the 
sex chromosomes with each other, at the end of the 
karyotype. Note: The X and Y chromosomes are not 
a homologous pair. The length of the X chromosome 
is between the lengths of chromosome 4 and 
chromosome 5. The Y chromosome is much 
shorter, about the same length as chromosome 14.
 5. Examine your ﬁ nished karyotype, and record your 
observations.
Analysis
 1. How many chromosomes does this cell have? How 
would you write the chromosome number to show 
the haploid chromosome number? 
 2. How would the karyotype differ if this were a 
gamete? What would its chromosome number be?
 3. Did these chromosomes come from a male or 
a female? How can you tell? 
Conclusion
 4. What kind of information can you infer from 
a karyotype?
16.A
INVESTIGATION
T a r g e t  S k i l l s
Preparing and interpreting models of 
a human karyotype
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Many people believe that 
the bands on a stained 
chromosome correspond 
to individual genes. In fact, 
a single band may include 
hundreds of genes.
