Chapter 16  Cellular Reproduction • MHR  559
(see Figure 16.9). This cell plate extends 
across the diameter of the cell, and it 
is then reinforced by the addition of 
cellulose and proteins to create a new 
cell wall. 
2
  How do mitosis and cytokinesis 
differ in plant cells and animal 
cells?
• • •
• • •
Figure 16.9 Cytokinesis in a plant cell. A new cell wall 
is forming between the two daughter cells.
Observing the Cell Cycle 
in Plant and Animal Cells
In this investigation, you will observe and compare the 
stages of the cell cycle in prepared slides of onion root 
tip cells and in whiteﬁ sh embryo cells.
Question
What stages of the cell cycle can you recognize and 
identify in plant and animal cells?
  
Safety Precautions
• Be sure that the microscope is turned off and your 
hands are dry when you plug in or disconnect the cord. 
• Handle the microscope slides with care.
Materials
• microscope
• prepared slide of onion root-tip cells
• prepared slide of whiteﬁ sh embryo cells
Procedure
 1. Place the onion root-tip slide on the microscope 
stage, and observe it under low power. Focus on 
the area just behind the tip of the root.
 2. Carefully shift to medium power, focus, and then go 
to high power to observe the cells. Try to ﬁ nd cells in 
the different phases of mitosis, and draw a cell in each 
phase. Also ﬁ nd and draw a cell in interphase and a 
cell undergoing cytokinesis. Label as many features 
as you can.
 3. Move the slide to concentrate your attention on the 
root tip. Note any differences between the root tip 
and the area you observed in step 2.
 4. Change back to lower power, and remove the onion 
root tip slide. Place the whiteﬁ sh embryo slide on the 
stage, and observe it under low power.
 5. Find an area of dividing cells. Change to medium 
power, focus, and then shift to high power. As you 
look at each cell, determine which phase of mitosis 
it is in.
 6. Draw one cell in interphase, one cell in each phase 
of mitosis, and one cell in cytokinesis. Label as many 
parts as you can. Note any difference between mitosis 
in animal cells and mitosis in plant cells.
 7. Copy the data table on the next page. Switch back to 
the onion slide and, working in pairs, observe every 
onion root-tip cell in one high power ﬁ eld of view and 
identify its phase of the cell cycle. Have one partner 
observe the slide and call out the phase of each cell 
while the other partner records the observations. 
After you do one full ﬁ eld of view, choose another 
16.B
INVESTIGATION
T a r g e t  S k i l l s
Identifying the stages of the cell cycle 
in plant and animal cells
Calculating the duration of each stage 
of the cell cycle in a plant or animal cell
Analyzing the similarities and 
differences of cell division in plant 
and animal cells
continued on next page 
Magnification: 514 ×
