560  MHR • Unit 7  Cell Division, Genetics, and Molecular Biology
Regulation of the Cell Cycle
You know that mitosis and cell division 
govern the growth, repair, and 
maintenance of plant and animal tissues. 
In your own body, about 150 billion cell 
divisions take place each day. What would 
happen if the wrong cells were dividing?
 
For any organism to develop properly 
and to remain healthy, its cells must divide 
only at certain times and they must stop 
dividing at the correct time. This requires 
a delicate balance among many different 
regulatory signals. Within a cell, speciﬁ c 
protein interactions serve as “start” or 
“stop” signals for cell division. External 
factors such as the presence of particular 
hormones, the availability of nutrients, 
and contact with other cells also play a role. 
 
Anything that interferes with 
regulatory signals can cause the cell cycle 
to proceed at an uncontrolled rate. The 
group of diseases that are associated with 
uncontrolled, rapid cell division are 
known as cancer. Rather than spending 
much of their cell cycle as functioning 
tissue cells in interphase, cancerous cells 
move quickly from one cell division to 
the next. The result is a fast-growing 
and switch roles. If you have not counted at least 
200 cells, then count a third ﬁ eld of view.
 8. Calculate the percentage of cells found in each stage 
by dividing the number of cells in a given stage by 
the total number of cells in the sample and then 
multiplying by 100:
 
  number in a stage 
 
__ 
 
total sample number  × 100
 
 Enter your calculated values in the data table.
 9. Assuming that it takes about 24 h (1440 min) for 
onion root-tip cells to go through one full cell cycle, 
you can calculate the amount of time the cells spend 
in each phase from the percentage of the cells in that 
stage: percent of cells in a stage × 1440 min. Enter 
your calculated values in the data table.
 10. Change back to lower power, and remove the slide. 
Turn off and unplug the microscope. 
Analysis
 1. What differences did you notice between the cells in 
the onion root tip and the cells farther away from the 
root tip? Consider
 
 a) the size of the cells 
b) the shape of the cells
 
 c) the number of dividing cells
 2. What differences did you notice between the onion 
root-tip cells and the whiteﬁ sh embryo cells? Consider 
 
 a) the size of the cells 
b) the shape of the cells
 
 c) the arrangement of chromosomes in the cells
 3. Draw a pie graph using the data you collected in 
steps 8 and 9.
 4. Do you think that your observations and calculations 
in steps 7–9 are representative of the cell division 
taking place in the entire root? Explain your answer.
Conclusion
 5. Prepare a table that compares and contrasts the 
events of the cell cycle in plant cells and animal cells.
Data table for determining timing of cell division
Number of Cells
Percent of total counted
Time in each stage
Field 1
Field 2
Field 3 
(optional)
Total
Interphase
Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Total cells
