HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 0

Black Gold Outreach School - Black Gold Regional Schools
HSS
1010
HEALTH SERVICES FOUNDATIONS

1 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

This resource is an adaptation of materials and information developed by T4T – LearnAlberta.ca,
youtube.com video clips, Peace River Outreach School, Frank Spragins Outreach School, and
Your Body and How It Works Science Reproducible Activity Book.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 2

INTRODUCTION

HSS1010 is an introductory level course that allows you to explore concepts
related to the determinants of health; the dimensions of wellness; basic
principles of anatomy, physiology, and disease; and basic safety and
reporting protocols for providing care to individuals. These concepts are
directly applicable to potential post-secondary studies and future career
paths in health, recreation, volunteer, and community-support settings. This
course is a prerequisite for several advanced Human and Social Services
courses that you may choose to enroll in during your high school studies.

In HSS1010: Health Services Foundations you will
• evaluate the determinants of good health and how these determinants
affect personal wellness
• explain the basic structure and function of the human body using
medical terminology
• describe safety strategies to prevent infection from blood borne
pathogens in health care and recreation settings, and identify basic
safety and reporting protocols for these settings
• examine the public health system, justify the importance of an active
lifestyle, and identify personal opportunities to enhance wellness
You will explore the following guiding questions:
• What does it mean to be well?
• How does society define health?
• What is your personal definition of health and wellness?
• How does the human body work to achieve and maintain optimum
health and wellness?
• What is the role of the individual in creating and maintaining personal
health and wellness?
• What choices can you make to maximize your personal physical,
mental, and spiritual health and wellness?
• What are the shared roles, rights, and responsibilities for wellness
between the individual and society?

3 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

COURSE ORIENTATION

HSS1010 is divided into four sections. To achieve success in this course, be
sure to carefully read all instructions. Complete all activities and
assignments to the best of your ability and submit your completed module
promptly for assessment.

Communication with your teacher helps your teacher know how you are
progressing and allows you to discuss any concerns you may have.
Communication can occur in the form of e-mails, phone calls, texts, or face-
to-face tutorials.

Section 1: Defining Health and Wellness

• Dimensions of Health and Wellness
• Determinants of Health

Section 2: Inside Out—How the Body Works

• Levels of Structural Organization
• Homeostasis
• Muscles of the Human Body
• How the Human Body Works to Create Movement

Section 3: Road Map to Wellness
• Nutritional Choices
• Physical Activity
• Sleep
• Regular Dental and Medical Checkups
• Being an Informed Consumer
• Protecting Yourself from Disease

Section 4: Public Health

• Who Is Responsible for Your Health?
• The Language of Health and Wellness
• Your Role as a Caregiver

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 4

SECTION 1 – DEFINING HEALTH AND WELLNESS

What does it mean to be healthy? What does wellness look or feel like? Since
1948, the World Health Organization has defined health as “a state of
complete physical, mental, and social well-being” and not merely the
absence of disease or infirmity. Wellness has been defined as “an active
process of becoming aware of and making choices toward a more successful
existence.”

Section 1 addresses the following outcome:
• evaluate the determinants of good health in Canadian society
o compare recognized international and national definitions of
health and wellness
o describe the twelve key determinants of health as defined by
Health Canada, providing specific examples
o describe how the determinants of health are used for evidence-
based decision-making related to health care policies

Keep these guiding questions in mind as you work through Section 1:
• What does it mean to be well?
• How does society define health?
• What is your personal definition of health and wellness?

5 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Dimensions of Health and Wellness

One way to describe health and wellness is to refer to the dimensions of
wellness. The dimensions represent different influences on your total health
and well-being, including physical, psychological, social, emotional, and
spiritual aspects. The dimensions are interdependent—they are constantly
interacting with each other.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 6

PHYSICAL
Physical wellness is the ability, motivation, and confidence to move
effectively and efficiently in a variety of situations; and the healthy growth,
development, and care of the body.

 How much sleep do you get? Do you
    awake feeling refreshed?
 How much physical activity do you get?
 How well-balanced is your nutrition?
 How is your general health?
 Do you avoid or minimize dangerous or
     risky behaviours?
 Do you regularly visit a doctor?
 How well do you manage stress?

INTELLECTUAL
Intellectual wellness is the development and the critical and creative use of
the mind to its fullest potential.

 Are you interested in learning new things?
 Do you enjoy creative and stimulating mental
    activities and games?
 Do you work hard to learn new things, both in and
         out of school?
 Can you see another person’s point of view when
         discussing an issue?

SOCIAL
Social wellness is relating positively to others and is influenced by many
factors. These factors include how individuals communicate, establish and
maintain relationships, how they are treated by others, and how they
interpret that treatment.

 Do you make time to develop healthy
 relationships?
 Do you respect others?
 Do you have a network of close friends and/or
 family?
 Are you able to communicate with and get along
 with a wide variety of people?

7 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

SPIRITUAL
Spiritual wellness is an understanding of one’s own values and beliefs
leading to a sense of meaning or purpose and a relationship to the global
community.

 Do you generally feel happy and “at peace” with
  your life?
 Do you have strong beliefs and values? Do you
 respect the values and beliefs of others?
 Do you believe your life has direction and
 meaning?
 Is there a direct relationship between your values
 and your daily actions?

EMOTIONAL
Emotional wellness is acknowledging, understanding, and expressing
thoughts and feelings in a constructive manner.

 Do you have people who you can ask for support
 when you need it?
 How much time do you spend in self-improvement
 and self-exploration?
 How self-aware are you?
 How well do you handle positive or negative
 emotions?

While there are many different versions of a “Wellness Wheel”, all of them
provide a visual representation of the concept that wellness demonstrates
the need for “balanced” or “well-rounded” lives. To achieve and maintain
harmony and balance in our lives, we must pay attention to all the
dimensions of wellness.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 8

What Determines Health?

According to Health Canada, wellness means making positive choices that
enhance your physical, mental, and spiritual health. At every stage of life,
health is determined by complex interactions between social and economic
factors, the physical environment, and individual behaviour. The Public
Health Agency of Canada identifies twelve key determinants of health.

Learn about them by viewing the YouTube video,

“Determinants of Health” by SolveSocialProblems
at   https://goo.gl/mBx0qj

The determinants of health are ranked by the Public Health Agency of
Canada as most influential to least influential, in the following order.

KEY DETERMINANT – 1.  Income and Social Status

Health and wellness improve at each step up the income and
social ladder. High income determines living conditions such
as safe housing and ability to buy sufficient good food. The
healthiest populations are those in societies which are
prosperous and have an equitable distribution of wealth.

KEY DETERMINANT – 2. Social Support Networks

When someone has a strong
support network of family,
friends, and community, they
will generally have better health.
A social support network can
enable someone to solve
problems and deal with adversity
more effectively. The caring and
respect that occurs in  social
relationships, and the resulting
sense of satisfaction and well-
being, seem to act as a buffer
against health problems.

KEY DETERMINANT – 3. Education and Literacy

9 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Health status improves with level of education.
Education is related to socioeconomic status, so
providing effective education for children and later
learning for adults can positively impact health and
prosperity. Education contributes to wellness by
equipping people with knowledge and skills for
problem solving, and helps provide a sense of control
and mastery over life circumstances. It increases
opportunities for job and income security, and job
satisfaction. And it improves people’s ability to access
and understand information to help keep them
healthy.

KEY DETERMINANT – 4. Employment/Working Conditions

Unemployment, underemployment, and
stressful or unsafe work are directly
connected to poor health. People who have
more control over their work
circumstances and fewer stress related
demands of the job are healthier and often
live longer than those in more stressful or
riskier work and activities.

KEY DETERMINANT – 5. Social Environments

Social stability, recognition of diversity, safety, good
working relationships, and cohesive communities
provide a supportive society that reduces or avoids
many potential risks to good health. Social or
community responses can add resources to an
individual’s repertoire of strategies to cope with
changes and foster health.

KEY DETERMINANT – 6. Physical Environments

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 10

The physical environment is an important
determinant of health. Contaminants in our air,
water, food and soil can cause a variety of negative
health effects, including cancer, birth defects,
respiratory illness and gastrointestinal ailments.
Factors related to housing, indoor air quality, and
the design of communities and transportation
systems can also significantly influence our physical
and psychological well-being.

KEY DETERMINANT – 7. Personal Health Practices and Coping Skills

Individuals can take action to prevent disease
and promote self-care, cope with challenges,
and develop self-reliance. Some of these
choices can include avoiding alcohol, tobacco,
and other toxins; eating well; and avoiding
risky behaviours, such as drinking and driving.

KEY DETERMINANT – 8. Healthy Child Development

Early childhood experiences can have significant effects
on brain development, school readiness, and health. A
young person’s development is greatly affected by his
or her housing and neighbourhood, family income, and
level of parents’ education; access to nutritious foods
and physical recreation; genetic makeup; and access
to medical and dental care.

11 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

KEY DETERMINANT – 9. Biology and Genetic Endowment

The basic biology and organic make-up of the human
body are an important determinant of health. In some
circumstances genetic endowment can predispose certain
individuals to particular diseases or health problems.

KEY DETERMINANT – 10. Health Services

Access to health services can significantly improve
a person’s health. In particular, access to services
that maintain and promote health, prevent disease,
and restore health can make a significant
difference.

KEY DETERMINANT – 11. Gender

Many health issues are related to gender-based
social status or roles. Gender refers to the array
of society-determined roles, personality traits,
attitudes, behaviours, values, relative power,
and influence that society places on the two
sexes.

KEY DETERMINANT – 12. Culture

Some people or groups of people may
face additional health risks due to
cultural values that may contribute to
conditions such as marginalization,
stigmatization, loss of or devaluation
of language and culture, and lack of
access to culturally appropriate health
care and services. In some cases,
culture can alleviate influences that
might otherwise have a more negative
effect.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 12

Determinants and Public Policy

The Public Health Agency of Canada and the World Health Organization have
concluded that there is a direct correlation between the determinants of
health and the health of individuals in a population.

Canada has adopted a “population health approach” to improving health care
issues. A population health approach is based on the belief that factors
outside the health care system significantly affect health. Canadian health
policy attempts to address the inequalities created by each of the
determinants of health.

Turn to your Assignment Booklet and complete questions 1 – 3 in

Section 1: Defining Health and Wellness.

13 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 14

SECTION 2 –  INSIDE OUT: HOW THE BODY WORKS

The human body is an amazingly complex machine. Body parts interact with
body systems to produce an organism that is capable of many functions.

In  Section 2 you will study the following topics:
• Levels of Structural Organization
• Homeostasis
• Muscles of the Human Body
• How the Human Body Works to Create Movement
Specifically, Section 2 addresses the following outcome:
• Explain basic principles of anatomy, physiology, and disease related to
systems of the human body
o identify common prefixes and suffixes related to anatomy,
physiology, pathology, and the terminology describing body
systems
o define the terms anatomy, physiology, pathology,
and homeostasis, including anatomical directional terms and
planes of division
o identify all of the systems of the human body using medical
terminology
o outline the organization of the body from chemicals to the whole
body, including identification of the role of cells, tissues, organs,
and body cavities
o explain the interrelationship between various body systems,
including negative and positive feedback in maintaining
homeostasis

15 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Anatomy and Physiology

The two branches of science that will help you understand your body parts
and functions are anatomy and physiology. Anatomy is the study of
structure and the relationships among structures—in this case, structures of
the body. Physiology studies the function of body parts and how they work.

Anatomy and physiology cannot be studied in isolation from each other.
Each part of the body is structurally designed to carry out certain functions.
So, structure (anatomy) and function (physiology) are studied together.

For example, bones function as rigid supports for the body. Glands perform
the function of manufacturing chemicals that stimulate the bones to build up
minerals so they can remain strong. Other chemicals cause bones to lose
minerals that are carried out in the blood to other parts of the body, where
those minerals are used for activities such as muscle contraction and
nervous activity.

Pathology is the scientific study of the nature of disease and its causes,
processes, development, and consequences. Pathological anatomy is the
study of structural changes related to disease.

Levels of Structural Organization

Your body is a wonderful machine that is made up of a number of systems
that all work together to keep you healthy and alive. This machine is
guaranteed to last for your whole lifetime, but you need to be careful with it.
To start understanding how this machine works, you need to understand
how your body is organized. As you know, you are a living organism,
arguably the most complex organism on this planet. All living things have
certain characteristics.

One characteristic of all living things is that they are
made of cells. The human body, which is made up of
numerous cells, begins as a single, newly fertilized
cell. A cell is the basic unit of your body. Cells can be
found in different shapes and sizes. They even come
in different colors. If you tried to count all the cells in
your body you would have to know how to count to
about 70 trillion. Sometimes the cells work alone; an
example of cells that work alone are red blood cells
that carry oxygen to other body cells.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 16

Sometimes cells work with other cells. When
groups of cells work together to do the same
job, they are called tissue. Bone cells work
together to form bone tissue. Muscle cells work
together to form muscle tissue. Nerve cells also
work together to form nerve tissue. By
definition, a tissue is an organization of a great
many similar cells with varying amounts and
kinds of nonliving, intercellular substance
between them.

Sometimes tissues need to work together, too, to
get the job done right. Different kinds of tissues
may work together to do the same job. Tissues that
work together are called organs. Your heart is an
organ. Muscle cells work together to form heart
tissue. Heart tissues work together to form the
wonderful pump that moves your blood around
inside your body. There are many other organs in
your body, such as your brain, your lungs, your
stomach, and even your skin.

To make your body be the best possible machine,
a lot of cooperation is necessary. Cells, tissues,
and organs must work together to get very
important jobs done. These parts, working
together are called a system. Your body has a
number of systems that keep it working properly.
Eleven major systems compose the human body:
the skeletal system, the muscular system, the
integumentary system, the nervous system, the
endocrine system, the cardiovascular system, the
lymphatic system, the respiratory system, the
digestive system, the urinary system, and the
reproductive system.

17 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

For purposes of study, the inside of the body
can be divided into several large spaces, or
body cavities, that contain our body
systems and related organs.

The two main cavities are
• the ventral cavity and
• the dorsal cavity

The ventral cavity has two subdivisions that
are separated by the diaphragm, the main
muscle used in breathing. They subdivisions
are
• the thoracic cavity and
• the abdominopelvic cavity

View the YouTube video produced by Mr. Ford’s class

“Introduction to Anatomy & Physiology: Levels of Organization”
at https://goo.gl/n8iJxv

for a review of this information.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 18

Our Bodies’ Systems

Most studies of the human body are organized according to the individual
systems and are grouped according to their general function.

General Function Systems
Protection, support, and movement Integumentary
Skeletal
Muscular
Coordination and control Nervous
Endocrine
Circulation Cardiovascular
Lymphatic
Nutrition and fluid balance Respiratory
Digestive
Urinary
Production of offspring Reproductive

View the YouTube video produced by the Amoeba Sisters

“The Human Body Systems – The 11 Champions”
at https://goo.gl/sDsmoY

for    an overview of the components, functions, and
interactions of each of the systems listed above.

1. The Integumentary System

The skin and structures derived from it such as
hair, nails, and sweat and oil glands.

Function:  Helps regulate body temperature,
protects the body, eliminates waste, and
receives certain stimuli such as temperature,
pressure, and pain.

19 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

2. The Skeletal System

All the bones of the body, their associated cartilages and joints
of the body.

Function:  Supports and protects the body, gives leverage,
produces blood cells and stores minerals.

3. The Muscular System

All the muscle tissue of the body, including skeletal,
visceral, and cardiac.

Function:  Works to create movement, maintains posture,
and produces heat.

4. The Nervous System

Brain, spinal cord, nerves and sense organs, such as the eye
and ear.

Function:  Regulates body activities through nerve impulses

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 20

5. The Endocrine System

All glands that produce hormones.

Function:  Regulates mood, growth and development,
tissue function, metabolism and sexual function and
reproductive processes

6. The Cardiovascular System

Blood, heart and blood vessels.

Function:  Distributes oxygen and nutrients to cells, carries
carbon dioxide and wastes from cells. Maintains the acid-base
balance of the body, protects against disease, prevents
hemorrhage by forming blood clots, and helps regulate body
temperature.

7. The Lymphatic System

Lymph, lymph nodes, lymph vessels and lymph glands, such
as the spleen, thymus gland, and tonsils.

Function:  Returns protein and plasma to the cardiovascular
system, transports fats from the digestive system to the
cardiovascular system, filters the blood, produces white blood
cells and protects against disease.

8. The Respiratory System

The lungs and a series of passageways leading into and out
of the lungs.

Function:  Supplies oxygen, eliminates carbon dioxide, and
helps regulate the acid-base balance of the body.

21 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

9. The Digestive System

A long tube and associated organs such as the salivary glands,
liver, gallbladder, and pancreas.

Function:  Breaks down food into components for use by cells
and eliminates solid waste.

10.    The Urinary System

Organs that produce, collect and eliminate urine

Function:  Regulates the composition of the blood,
eliminates waste, regulates the fluid and electrolyte
balance and volume, and helps maintain the acid-
base balance of the body.

11. The Reproductive System

Organs (testes and ovaries) that
produce reproductive cells (sperm
and ova) and organs that transport
and store reproductive cells.

Function:  Reproduces the organism

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 22

Homeostasis

More than a century ago, French physiologist, Claude Bernard, made a
remarkable observation. He noted that body cells survived in a healthy
condition only when the temperature, pressure, and chemical composition of
their environment remained relatively constant. Later, an American
physiologist, Walter B. Cannon suggested the name homeostasis for the
relatively constant states maintained by the body. Homeostasis is a key
word in modern physiology. It comes from two Greek word – “homeo,”
meaning the same, and “stasis,” meaning standing. “Standing or staying the
same” then is the literal meaning of homeostasis.

One of the ways body systems work together is to maintain a constant
environment no matter what is happening on the outside. Human bodies are
faced with a constantly changing environment, on both the outside and the
inside. Cells function best when conditions remain as consistent as possible.

Homeostasis works through what is termed negative feedback. Think about
the thermostat in your house. It is set to a constant temperature. When the
temperature outside goes down, your thermostat recognizes a change in the
external environment and sends a signal to your furnace to turn on. Once
the temperature in your house returns to the set temperature, another
signal is sent to stop the furnace.

Homeostasis in your body is primarily controlled by your brain (nervous
system) and your hormones (endocrine system). Some examples of
homeostasis in your body are
>temperature control  >heart rate
>blood-sugar control  >detoxification
>respiratory rate   >water balance
>blood pressure

Watch the YouTube video by Biology/Medicine Animations HD

“Homeostasis in the Body – 3D Animation”
at   https://goo.gl/AOjWnR

to see how homeostasis works to control your blood-sugar levels.

23 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

How the Human Body Works to Create Movement

Why Is Movement Important?

You’ve heard the message that movement is important for your health, but
the message isn’t just about exercise. Human bodies need to move to live.

• Movement of the skeletal muscles causes corresponding movement in
internal organs, which helps the organs perform their functions.
• Movement of muscles exerts force on bones, which causes the bones
to produce important minerals, such as calcium, to help keep bones
strong.
• Lack of movement in bedridden patients can cause muscles to shrink.
It can also cause bedsores due to lack of blood circulation.
• Muscles play an important role in maintaining body temperature by
creating heat.
• The human body actually craves movement in order to aid processes
such as immunity, digestion, circulation, detoxification, hormone
regulation, pregnancy, and metabolism.

Moving Along: The Muscular System
In order to understand how our body moves, we need to study the muscular
system in some depth. This system has two basic jobs and two important
parts that we need to look at closely. Let’s start by looking at the parts of
the system, then we can see how they work together to do their jobs.
Muscles
The first part of the muscular system that we need to learn about is the
muscles. Muscles are organs. If you remember what you learned about the
body’s organization, you know that organs are groups of cells and tissues
that are working together.
The basic unit of a muscle is a muscle cell. A muscle cell is made up of two
kinds of protein filaments called actin and myosin. The actin and myosin
filaments slide past each other and that makes a muscle cell work.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 24

These muscle cells are often called muscle fibers.  Groups of muscle fibers
are wrapped together inside a special covering made of connective tissue.
Then bundles of muscle fibers are grouped together to form muscles. Since
muscles are living tissue, they need food, water, and oxygen to stay alive.
Blood vessels in the muscles bring the oxygen and nutrients that the
muscles need. Muscles also have nerve tissue in them to tell them when and
how to do their jobs.
There are more than 650 muscles in your body. For males, muscles can be
up to 42 percent of the total body weight. For females, the percentage is a
little bit lower, about 35 percent.

Muscle
Bundle of
Muscle Fibers
(cells)
Connective
Tissue
Muscle Fiber
(cell)
Actin and
Myosin
Filaments

25 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Classifying Muscles
Muscles are classified into two basic groups in your body:  the voluntary
muscles and the involuntary muscles.

Voluntary muscles are usually called skeletal muscles but sometimes they
might be called striated muscles. If you see pictures of skeletal muscles,
they look like they have stripes. That is why they are called striated muscles.

Skeletal muscles are long muscle fibers. They are attached to bones in the
skeletal system with tendons. They have blood vessels bringing oxygen and
food to them and nerves connected to them, telling them what to do and
when to do it. Skeletal muscles are found in parts of your body that you can
move, such as your arms, legs, hands, and face. You have more skeletal
muscles than any other kind of  muscle in your body.

There are two different kinds of involuntary muscles. First, there are the
smooth muscles that are sometimes called visceral muscles. They are
thin muscles with cells that look like spindles. They have the nucleus right in
the middle of each cell. These muscles are connected to a special part of
your nervous system called the autonomous nervous system. They work
without you thinking about it! Smooth muscles are found in your skin, your
blood vessels, and in the organs inside your body.

The other kind of involuntary muscle is very special. It is called cardiac
muscle, and it is only found in your heart.  Cardiac muscles are striated like
skeletal muscles, but the cells branch out and wave together so they look a
little bit different. This kind of muscle acts like other involuntary muscles;
you have no control over the beating of your heart.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 26

Locating and Naming Skeletal Muscles
There are over 600 skeletal muscles in the human body. You probably
already know the names of some of the major muscles because they are
part of common terminology we use every day. Use the anatomical diagrams
below to familiarize yourself with a number of the most common muscle
names.

27 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Holding It All Together:  Tendons
As you already know, the skeletal system works with the muscular system to
move the body. In order for movement to happen, the muscles need to be
attached to the bones to get them moving.

Each muscle is attached to bone at two ends. At one end of the muscle, the
attachment is firm; it does not move. This may be called the origin of the
muscle. The muscle is attached directly to the bone at that end. At the other
end of the muscle, which is called the insertion, the attachment can move.
At that end, the muscle is attached with a connective tissue called a tendon.

As a muscle works, or contracts, it gets smaller. The insertion end of the
muscle gets closer to the origin end of the muscle. The tendon stretches to
let the muscle shorten. When the muscle relaxes, it gets longer again. The
tendon shortens back to its original length. A tendon is very similar to a big,
thick rubber band!

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 28

Which Way Are You Going?
So how exactly do those muscles get your bones into motion? Well, they
work in pairs. One muscle in the pair starts to contract. When that muscle is
done contracting, it starts to relax. The actin and myosin filaments begin
sliding back, away from each other. The muscle becomes thinner and longer.

Don’t forget we said that the muscles work in pairs. When one muscle is
contracting, or getting shorter and thicker, the other muscle in the pair is
relaxing, or getting longer and thinner. Here’s a little experiment you can do
to learn how muscles work in pairs. Put your right arm out at your side,
straight out from you shoulder with the palm of your hand facing up. Lift
your hand toward your ear without moving your shoulder. Concentrate on
the muscles in your upper arm when you move your hand. The muscle on
the underside of your arm (your triceps) will get longer and thinner. It is
relaxing. The muscle on the top of your upper arm (your biceps) will get
shorter and thicker. It is contracting. The two muscles work together. Now
put your hand back down so your arm goes straight out from your shoulder.
Concentrate on the same upper arm muscles when you do that. Your biceps
will be relaxing this time. Do you notice it getting longer and thinner? Your
triceps will be contracting. You should be able to feel it getting shorter and
thicker.

Why do your muscles move? How do they know what to do? Remember we
said that your muscles are attached to nerves? Your brain sends messages
through your nerves to your muscles. The nerves tell the muscles when it is
time to contract and when it is time to relax. Skeletal muscles wait until you
decide you want to move. You make your brain send the messages to the
muscles. Skeletal muscles contract very quickly, but they tire out very
quickly, too. They control your posture and your body movements.

29 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Describing Movement
In order to be able to describe the location of structures in the body and the
direction of movement so that everyone can understand them in the same
way, a point of reference is used. This point of reference is called anatomical
position. If you stand in front of a mirror with your hands at your sides and
the palms of your hands facing the mirror, you are in anatomical position.

The Planes of the Body

The structure of the body can be described using planes—imaginary flat
surfaces that run through the body and divide the body into sections. Planes
are used to describe direction of movement.
• The sagittal, or median, plane runs vertically through the middle of the
body, dividing it into right and left halves.
• The coronal, or frontal, plane runs vertically and divides the body into
front (anterior) and back (posterior) halves.
• The transverse, or horizontal, plane runs horizontally and divides the
body into upper (superior) and lower (inferior) halves.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 30

It is also useful to have common language for describing the location of a
structure. Here are some common directional terms that you should be
familiar with.
Anatomical Term Description
medial toward the midline of the body
lateral  away from the midline of the body
proximal toward a reference point (extremity)
distal away from a reference point (extremity)
inferior/caudal or caudad lower or below/away from the head or towards
the lower end of a structure
superior/cephalad or cranial upper or above/toward the head or the upper
part of a structure
anterior (ventral) toward the front
posterior (dorsal) toward the back
superficial toward or on the surface of the body
deep away from the surface of the body

31 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

In addition, the movement created when muscles pull on bones can also be
described in several categories. As you read each description, try to move
your body in a way that demonstrates the movement being described.

Type of
Movement
Location Description

angular
flexion Narrowing joint angle in sagittal plane
(bending elbow)
extension Increasing joint angle in sagittal plane
(straightening elbow)
abduction Lifting a body part away from body
midline (in coronal plane)
adduction Returning a body part to body midline
(in coronal plane)
circular circumduction A movement at a joint where the distal
end of the bone moves in a circle while
the proximal end of the bone remains
stable
rotation Moving a bone around its axis (a line
drawn through its middle)
special at forearm pronation A movement of the forearm in which the
palm of the hand is turned backward
supination A movement of the forearm in which the
palm is turned forward

special at ankle
plantarflexion An extension of the foot at the ankle
joint so the toes are pointed down
dorsiflexion A flexion of the foot at the ankle joint so
the toes are moving towards the shin
eversion A movement of the bottom of the foot
away from the median plane
inversion A movement of the bottom of the foot
towards the median plane

special at shoulder
elevation Lifting a body part (shoulder shrugs)
depression Lowering a body part (dropping the
shoulders after shrugging)
protraction A movement of the clavicle forward in
the horizontal plane
retraction A movement of a protracted body part
backward on a horizontal plane

Now turn to your Assignment Booklet and complete questions 1 – 15
in Section 2: Inside Out – How the Body Works.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 32

SECTION3 – ROAD MAP TO WELLNESS

According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, healthy living means
making positive choices that enhance your physical, mental, and spiritual
health. Healthy choices include choosing to
• eat a nutritious diet using Canada’s Food Guide
• surround yourself with a supportive social network
• be active every day
• get enough sleep
• adopt healthy lifestyle practices, such as cleanliness and dental
hygiene
• attend regular medical and dental checkups
• take responsibility for your own health and wellness, including being
an informed consumer
In  Section 3 you will study the following topics:
• Nutritional Choices
• Physical Activity
• Sleep
• Regular Dental and Medical Checkups
• Being an Informed Consumer
• Protecting Yourself from Disease

33 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Nutritional Choices
People choose particular foods for many different reasons:
• convenience
• cultural customs or preferences
• lack of information regarding food choices
• based on routine or mood rather than hunger
• one person in the household does most of the meal planning,
shopping, and preparation
“Eating Well with Canada’s Food Guide” is a great place for accurate
information on healthy eating. Read through it now to discover what foods
are best for you, to learn how much food you need every day, and to find
out the benefits of eating well and being active every day.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 34

35 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 36

37 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 38

39 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 40

Physical Activity

According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, more than half of
Canadian children and youth are not active enough for optimal growth and
development.

Canadian girls are less active than boys, with only 38 percent of girls and 48
percent of boys considered active enough.

How much physical activity is recommended for youth? Children and youth
should try to accumulate at least 90 minutes of physical activity per
day and decrease the amount of time they spend on sedentary activities
like watching videos, playing electronic games, and sitting at a computer.

Review Canadian Physical Activity Guidelines for Youth 12 – 17 Years, which
sets out general recommendations for daily activity. Use the
recommendations to help get more active.

41 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 42

Sleep

How Much Sleep Do I Need?

Most teens need about 8 1/2 to
9 hours of sleep each night. The
right amount of sleep is
essential for anyone who wants
to do well on a test or play
sports without tripping over
their feet. Unfortunately,
though, many teens don't get
enough sleep.

Why Aren't Teens Getting Enough Sleep?
Until recently, teens were often given a bad rap for staying up late,
oversleeping for school, and falling asleep in class. But recent studies show
that adolescent sleep patterns actually differ from those of adults or kids.

These studies show that during the teen years, the body's circadian rhythm
(sort of like an internal biological clock) is temporarily reset, telling a person
to fall asleep later and wake up later. This change in the circadian rhythm
seems to be due to the fact that the brain hormone melatonin is produced
later at night for teens than it is for kids and adults. This can make it harder
for teens to fall asleep early.

These changes in the body's circadian rhythm coincide with a time when
we're busier than ever. For most teens, the pressure to do well in school is
more intense than when they were kids, and it's harder to get by without
studying hard. And teens also have other time demands — everything from
sports and other extracurricular activities to fitting in a part-time job to save
money for college.

Early start times in some schools may also play a role in this sleep deficit.
Teens who fall asleep after midnight may still have to get up early for
school, meaning that they may only squeeze in 6 or 7 hours of sleep a night.
A couple hours of missed sleep a night may not seem like a big deal, but can
create a noticeable sleep deficit over time.

43 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Why Is Sleep Important?
This sleep deficit impacts everything from a person's ability to pay attention
in class to his or her mood. According to the National Sleep Foundation’s
2006 Sleep in America poll, more than one quarter of high school students
fall asleep in class, and experts have been able to tie lost sleep to poorer
grades. Lack of sleep also damages teens' ability to do their best in athletics.

Slowed responses and concentration from lack of sleep don't just affect
school or sports performance, though. More than half of teens surveyed
reported that they have driven a car drowsy over the past year and 15% of
students in the 10th to 12th grades drive drowsy at least once a week. The
National Highway Safety Traffic Administration estimates that more than
100,000 accidents, 40,000 injuries, and 1,500 people are killed in the U.S.
every year in crashes caused by drivers who are simply tired. Young people
under the age of 25 are far more likely to be involved in drowsy driving
crashes.

Lack of sleep has also been linked to emotional troubles, such as feelings of
sadness and depression. Sleep helps keep us physically healthy, too, by
slowing our body's systems enough to re-energize us after everyday
activities.

How Do I Know if I'm Getting Enough?
Even if you think you're getting enough sleep, you may not be. Here are
some of the signs that you may need more sleep:

• difficulty waking up in the morning
• inability to concentrate
• falling asleep during classes
• feelings of moodiness and even depression

How Can I Get More Sleep?
Recently, some researchers, parents, and teachers have suggested that
middle- and high-school classes begin later in the morning to accommodate
teens' need for more sleep. Some schools have already implemented later
start times. You and your friends, parents, and teachers can lobby for later
start times at your school, but in the meantime you'll have to make your
own adjustments.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 44

Here are some things that may help you to sleep better:

• Set a regular bedtime. Going to bed at the same time each night signals
to your body that it's time to sleep. Waking up at the same time every day
can also help establish sleep patterns. So try to stick as closely as you can to
your sleep schedule even on weekends. Don't go to sleep more than an hour
later or wake up more than 2 to 3 hours later than you do during the week.

• Exercise regularly. Try not to exercise right before bed, though, as it can
rev you up and make it harder to fall asleep. Finish exercising at least three
hours before bedtime. Many sleep experts believe that exercising in late
afternoon may actually help a person sleep.

• Avoid stimulants. Don't drink beverages with caffeine, such as soda and
coffee, after 4 PM. Nicotine is also a stimulant, so quitting smoking may help
you sleep better. And drinking alcohol in the evening can also cause a
person to be restless and wake up during the night.

• Relax your mind. Avoid violent, scary, or action movies or television
shows right before bed — anything that might set your mind and heart
racing. Reading books with involved or active plots may also keep you from
falling or staying asleep.

• Unwind by keeping the lights low. Light signals the brain that it's time
to wake up. Staying away from bright lights (including computer screens!),
as well as meditating or listening to soothing music, can help your body
relax. Try to avoid TV, computer and telephone at least one hour before you
go to bed.

• Don't nap too much. Naps of more than 30 minutes during the day may
keep you from falling asleep later.

• Avoid all-nighters. Don't wait until the night before a big test to study.
Cutting back on sleep the night before a test may mean you perform worse
than you would if you'd studied less but got more sleep.

• Create the right sleeping environment. Studies show that people sleep
best in a dark room that is slightly on the cool side. Close your blinds or
curtains (and make sure they're heavy enough to block out light) and turn
down the thermostat in your room (pile on extra blankets or wear PJs if
you're cold). Lots of noise can be a sleep turnoff, too.

• Wake up with bright light. Bright light in the morning signals to your
body that it's time to get going.

45 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Regular Dental and Medical Check-ups

Part of healthy living involves proper maintenance of your body. Just as
most people who drive a vehicle schedule regular maintenance appointments
to keep the vehicle operating reliably and efficiently, you too need to
perform regular checkups to keep your body working properly.

Consider the following questions:
• How often do you visit the dentist? The doctor? Other medical
practitioners?
• What is your family philosophy on medical and dental care?
• What factors influence how often you access medical practitioners?
Two determinants of health have a direct impact on how often an individual
might access medical care:
• personal health practices and coping skills
• health services

How often should you visit the doctor?
Although there is not an official recommendation, many medical
organizations, such as the Canadian Medical Association, Public Health
Agency of Canada, and World Health Organization, all agree that medical
conditions are more likely to be prevented or caught early with access to
regular medical checkups.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 46

How often should you visit the dentist?
According to the Canadian Dental Association, how often you go for a dental
exam depends on your personal oral health needs. The goal is to catch small
problems early. For many people, this means a checkup every six months.
Your dentist may suggest that you visit more or less often depending on
conditions such as how well you care for your teeth and gums, problems you
have that need to be checked or treated, and how fast tartar builds up on
your teeth.

Ask yourself the following questions:
• Do I brush twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste and follow my
dentist’s instructions on how to brush properly?
• Do I eat a well-balanced diet, including food from all four food groups?
• Do I have a history of cavities or gum disease?
• Do I limit sweets and sticky foods?
• Is my overall health good?
• Do I floss every day?
• Do I smoke?
The answers are all factors
that affect your oral health.
They will help you and your
dentist decide how often you
need to visit for checkups.

You should not determine your
need for dental care on what
your dental plan covers.

47 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Being an Informed Consumer

One method of taking responsibility for your health and wellness is to
actively seek knowledge about health, wellness, and your body. You hear all
kinds of promises in the media that certain products will make you healthier,
thinner, stronger, more popular, and the owner of a generally improved life.
Can you believe everything that is presented to you via television, radio,
billboards, magazines, the Internet, and so on?

There are many examples of false or misleading advertising. Here is just a
quick sample:

Reebok's EasyTone Shoes
In 2009 and 2010, Reebok ran a series
of ads for its EasyTone and RunTone
shoes featuring lithe and toned models
professing the benefits of the footwear's
special toning soles. The ads claimed
that laboratory tests had found that
Tone shoes were "proven to work your
hamstrings and calves up to 11%
harder and tone your butt up to 28%
more than regular sneakers ... just by
walking!" Apparently, the special
uneven sole of the shoe forced you to
use more muscles when you moved.

The LA Times reported that an FTC investigation found the only thing that EasyTone shoes
actually did was make it uncomfortable to walk. As a result, Reebok was forced to refund
more than $25 million in purchases.

Airborne Herbal Supplement
For a while, Airborne seemed like a classic American success
story. The result of a second grade teacher's research, the
herbal supplement became a national phenomenon after it
appeared to finally provide the cure/prevention for the
common cold that science had yet to figure out. For 10 years it
reigned as the leading cold prevention supplement on the
market -  and then the FTC got interested. According to
npr.org, a federal investigation found that the anecdotal
benefits of Airborne were just another example of the placebo
effect. In reality, the tablets did absolutely nothing to boost the
immune system or prevent colds. This incited a class-action
lawsuit against the company that Airborne finally settled in
2008 for $23.3 million.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 48

Dannon Activia Yogurt
Jamie Lee Curtis might be enthusiastic about the
health benefits of Dannon's Activia line of yogurts,
but the FTC isn't. In 2009, a federal judge found that
Dannon's claims that a daily serving of Activia would
relieve irregularity and help expedite the digestion
process were totally unsubstantiated. It turned out
the company had been charging a 30% premium on
the "probiotic" yogurts over other brands when in
reality the contents in the cups were all the same.
As a result, the company was forced to pay out $35
million to consumers in a 2009 class-action lawsuit
and another $21 million to the FTC a year later, as
reported by ABC News.

Looking at the amount of misleading advertisements that pervade modern
media, consumers should be wary any time they hear that a product is
"scientifically proven" to work. Unless the advertiser specifically states that
its claims have been validated by the FDA, there's no reason to trust any
purported medical benefits of any piece of merchandise, whether it's shoes
or cold medicine. Often, these health and fitness products are just modern
interpretations of the snake oil that bankrupted early settlers in the Wild
West. So the next time you're tempted to buy a product that looks too good
to be true, just save your money – because it probably is.

What about Diet Supplements?

Peer influence, media, and family all play a huge role in your choices as a
consumer, including your health and wellness choices. One area where
young people might be more influenced by peers or media is the choice to
take supplements to enhance athletic performance or improve body image.

Nutritional supplements can be a very controversial topic. How much do you
know about common supplements?

Are energy drinks safe?
Four types of adverse reactions have been reported to Health Canada.
Energy drinks are considered a natural health product, and should be
consumed only according to the instructions on the label.

49 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

What are some common performance enhancing or body enhancing
supplements?
Sports drinks, sports bars, energy gels, protein powder, amino acids,
creatine phosphate, steroids, ephedrine, and caffeine are just a few of the
common supplements.

Are all supplements regulated by Health Canada?
No. Most sports drinks, sports bars, and protein powders are regulated as
food, some are regulated as supplements, and some are not regulated at all.

How can I tell if a supplement is safe to use?
Health Canada has information on supplements, or you can ask your doctor,
a pharmacist, or a sports nutritionist for information. Be careful about
information you find on the Internet.

Is there an easy way to monitor the safety of a supplement?
Food products have a nutrition facts table on their label. For natural health
products, look for a natural product number (NPN) or drug identification
number (DIN).

Will protein supplements make me bigger and stronger?
Excessive protein intake will not make you bigger and stronger. Research
shows that protein in excess of 2 grams per kilogram of body weight per day
does not increase the rate of muscle growth.

I am worried about my weight. Are meal replacement products safe?
While meal replacements technically are not unsafe, you need to ask
yourself two questions:
1.  Do I really need to be worried about my weight?
2.  Can I change my weight by eating healthy foods and being more active?

What is a healthy body image?
Healthy bodies come in all shapes and sizes. A healthy body image is when
you accept and feel proud of your natural body shape.

Why do teens choose to use supplements?
Often teens are unaware that the products they are using are supplements.
There sometimes is tremendous pressure from the media, peers, and
coaches to look a certain way.

With so much misinformation out there, what should you believe about
nutrition information? Read the following document for help.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 50

51 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 52

Protecting Yourself from Disease

Hand Washing
How important is hand washing?
Eighty percent of common infections are spread by our hands. According to
Alberta Health and Wellness, hand washing, in combination with
immunization, is the best way to prevent disease.

What types of disease can good hand washing prevent?
1. Diseases spread through fecal-oral transmission can be reduced by good
hand washing.  Infections that may be transmitted through this route
include salmonellosis, shigellosis, hepatitis A, giardiasis, and enterovirus.
Because these diseases are spread through the ingestion of even the
tiniest particles of fecal material, hand washing after using the toilet
cannot be over-emphasized.

2. Diseases spread through indirect contact with respiratory secretions can
be reduced by good hand washing. Microorganisms that may be
transmitted through this route include influenza, streptococcus, and the
common cold. Because these diseases may be spread indirectly by hands
contaminated by respiratory discharges of infected people, illness may be
avoided by washing hands after coughing or sneezing and after shaking
hands with someone who has been coughing and sneezing.

3. Diseases may also be spread when hands are contaminated with urine,
saliva or other moist body substances. Microorganisms transmitted by
one or more body substances include typhoid, staphylococcal organisms,
and Epstein-Barr virus. These organisms may be transmitted from person
to person or indirectly by contamination of food or inanimate objects such
as toys.

When should you wash your hands?
Wash your hands before
• handling or eating food or feeding others
• inserting or removing contact lenses
• brushing or flossing teeth
• treating wounds or cuts

53 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Wash your hands after
• handling garbage
• coughing or sneezing
• blowing your nose or wiping someone else’s nose
• treating wounds or cuts
• returning home from school, work, or shopping
• going to the toilet, helping someone else use the toilet, or changing a
diaper
• having any contact with a person who is sick or with the immediate
environment of a person who is sick
Also, children should wash their hands after playing with toys shared with
other children.

How should you wash your hands?
1. Use regular soap (liquid or bar soap). Antibacterial soap is not necessary
    and can promote resistance to antibiotics.

2. Wet hands with warm, running water and lather well.

3. Rub the hands together for about the amount of time it would take to sing
       the song, “Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star,” (about 15 to 20 seconds).

4. Scrub all over, including the backs of the hands, the wrists, between the
    fingers and under the finger nails.

5. Rinse under running water (for about 10 seconds).

6. Dry with a clean or disposable towel. If using a public restroom, use a
    disposable towel to turn off the faucet to avoid further contact with the
    tap.

When and how should you use hand sanitizers?
When soap and water are not available, alcohol-based hand sanitizers are an
excellent choice to use. Sanitizers only work to kill bacteria and viruses,
unfortunately they don’t work well if your hands are dirty or soiled.

1.  Put sanitizer on the palm of your hand and rub your hands together.

2.  Cover all surfaces, including fingers and wrists, and rub until dry (about
     15 to 25 seconds).

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 54

Immunization

Immunization against disease is another controversial topic. View the
following videos to learn Health Canada’s current perspective on the
necessity and effectiveness of disease immunization.

Immunize Canada-
Immunisation Canada

https://goo.gl/96HW7r

Immunize Canada -
Influenza

https://goo.gl/CAYSTm

Bloodborne Pathogens
Bloodborne pathogens are micro-organisms that may be present in human
blood. These micro-organisms can be transmitted to people who are exposed
to contaminated blood or body fluids.

Although there are many bloodborne pathogens, we will focus on these four:
• human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
• hepatitis A (HPA)
• hepatitis B (HBV)
• hepatitis C (HCV)

55 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

View the following video clips and/or visit the following websites to learn
about these diseases.
HIV and AIDS –
explained in a simple
way
https://goo.gl/vqoINQ
by simpleshow foundation

HIV and AIDS – Fact
Sheet
https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/education-
materials/fact-sheets/19/45/hiv-
aids--the-basics

The Three Unwise
Monkeys learn what
Hepatitis A, B and C
are.
https://goo.gl/64zqgL
by Martin Georgiev

Hepatitis A, B, C –
Fact Sheet

http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Resour
ces/Professionals/PDFs/ABCTable.pdf

Turn to your Assignment Booklet and complete questions 1 – 8 in

Section 3: Road Map to Wellness.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 56

SECTION 4: PUBLIC HEALTH

What roles, rights, and responsibilities for wellness are shared between the
individual and society?

Public health addresses the health needs of communities and individuals.
Two levels of government, provincial and federal, work together to provide
public health in Canada. The primary focus is on prevention and population
health needs rather than individual health needs.

The role of the Public Health Agency of Canada is to
• promote health
• prevent and control chronic diseases and injuries
• prevent and control infectious diseases
• prepare for and respond to public health emergencies
• serve as a central point for sharing Canada’s expertise with the rest of
the world
• apply international research and development to Canada’s public
health programs
• strengthen intergovernmental collaboration on public health and
facilitate national approaches to public health policy and planning

Section 4 addresses the following outcomes:
• Summarize the shared roles and responsibilities of individuals,
community, and government involved with health care.
• Define terms related to wellness.

57 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Who is Responsible for Your Health?

Canada’s health care system provides universal coverage for medically
necessary health care services through a partnership between the federal
government and each of the provinces and territories.

Health Canada’s responsibilities include
• setting and administering national principles for the health care system
through the Canada Health Act. This Act sets out the primary objective
of Canadian health care policy, which is “to protect, promote and
restore the physical and mental well-being of residents of Canada and
to facilitate reasonable access to health services without financial or
other barriers.”
• delivering health care services to specific groups—for example, First
Nations and Inuit people
• partnering with each province and territory to plan and develop
initiatives around health care human resource planning, medical
technologies, and the delivery of primary health care

In Alberta the provincial health ministry is Alberta Health. The
responsibilities of Alberta Health include

• administration and delivery of health-
care services using transfer funds
from Health Canada

• issuing health care cards and
administering the Alberta Health Care
Insurance Plan

• planning and delivering health support and services to more than 3.7
million adults and children living in Alberta through Alberta Health
Services

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 58

This health care flow chart gives an overview of the various levels of service
provided and who covers the costs.

Private Health Insurance
some people have supplemental private insurance coverage through group plans, which covers
the cost of these supplemenatry services.
Additional Services (for certain groups)
health services that are not generally covered under the
publicly funded health-care system

include prescription drugs, dental and vision care, medical
equipment and appliances, independent living, and services
such as podiatrists and chiropractors
Home Care & Community Health Services
referral by doctors, hospitals, community agencies, families,
and potential residents
needs are assessed and services are coordinated to provide
continuity and comprehensive care
Hospitals, Long-Term Care Facilities, & Community Care Facilities
usually operated by community boards of trustees, voluntary
organizations, or municipalities
usually services provided are paid for by the provincial and
territorial governments, whle room and board are paid for by
the indiviual
Primary Health Care
first point of contact through doctor, nurse, other health
professional, or by phone or computer
publicly funded through general tax
revenues without charges to the patient

59 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Complemenatry Health Care System
In the past, the focus of Canada’s health care systesm was to cure patients
of disease. However, in recent years, the focus of Canda’s health care
system has widened to include disease prevention. This shift has given rise
to a complementary system of health care within Canada.

Canada’s system of complementary health care includes alternative forms of
health care such as
 herbal remedies, homeopathy,
and naturopathy
 manipulation (osteopathy,
chiropractic, acupuncture,
acupressure, massage
therapy, and reflexology)
 devices (ozone generators,
negative ionizers, radionic
machines)
 mind cure (hypnotherapy,
meditation, mental imaging or
visualization)
 folk medicine (Aboriginal
healers, Ayurvedic medicine)

Increasingly, the public health and complementary systems of health care
are used together to care for or treat patients or clients. This is referred to
as integrative health.

The two scenarios below provide examples of integrative health:

 A medical doctor offers acupunture for pain relief or suggests mental
imaging in addition to or instead of conventional therapy.

 A patient receives a diagnosis from a medical doctor of a specific
disease. In addition to receiving the treatment prescribed by the
doctor, the patient seeks an alternative practitioner who provides
supplemental therapies.

Note to Student:  If you use supplementary therapy, food supplements and vitamins, treatments and/or
procedures recommended by alternative practitioners, or medications prescribed by another doctor, always inform
your doctor when you visit her or him about any matter of your health.

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 60

Your Role as a Caregiver

Many of you are taking
this course because you
are interested in pursuing
a career within the health
care industry.

What are your legal
obligations as a person
providing services in
health care, community
support, volunteer, or
recreational settings?

As a caregiver you have access to private information about the people you
work with. Alberta’s Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy
Act (FOIP) requires that you should have access to only that personal
information necessary to do your job. FOIP also requires that you keep this
information confidential at all times and only use it for the purpose for which
you were given access.

You should disclose confidential client information only as necessary, with
consent, as legally required or where the failure to disclose would cause
significant harm to the client or others. The one exception to this rule is if
you suspect that someone is being abused.

Unfortunately, you also need to take precautions to protect yourself from
being accused of inappropriate behaviour. You should, for example,
• strictly follow all rules and procedures for conduct
• always maintain a professional relationship with people in your care
• if at all possible, never be alone with someone in your care, especially
if the person is of the opposite sex

61 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

What if You Suspect Someone Is Being Abused?
Children depend on the adults in their lives to care for and protect them.
They have a right to be safe from harm and neglect. Most of the time, young
people who are being abused will demonstrate signs of the abuse, even if
they never tell anyone. Sometimes a young person may display signs that
seem to indicate abuse, but really the signs are pointing out another issue in
his or her life. As a person in a helping role, you may be in a position to
observe or suspect abuse. If you know the signs and know what to do when
you see the signs and suspect abuse, you can help. It is the combination,
frequency and duration of indicators that should alert you to a
problem.

Type of Abuse Signs, Symptoms, & Indicators
Physical Abuse  unexplained bruises, welts, lacerations, burns, or
abrasions
 unwillingness to tell you how an injury occurred
 extreme behaviours (from extreme aggressiveness
to extreme withdrawal)
 lack of trust and fear of physical contact with adults
 wearing clothing that covers arms and legs and
resisting changing clothing for any reason
Neglect  appears hungry, listless and tired, has poor personal
hygiene and frequently unattended physical or
medical needs (hair, teeth, eyes and ears)
 gets inadequate supervision or childcare
arrangements
 “fails to thrive” despite lack of disease or
abnormality
Emotional Abuse  displays a range of behaviours from aggressiveness
and being out of control to being withdrawn and
depressed
 seeks constant approval and has an unusual need to
please adults
 has unusual fear of consequences of actions – often
leads to lying
Sexual Abuse  has detailed knowledge of sexual behaviour
inappropriate for the child’s age
 exhibits sexually precocious behaviour, or, creates
artwork involving sexually explicit body parts
 receives unexplained gifts or money
 is reluctant to go to a particular place or be with a
particular person

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 62

Procedures for Reporting Child Abuse
If a child discloses abuse to you, do not ask for details. Listen to the
information provided and record it as soon as possible in the child’s own
words. Be supportive and let the child know it is right to tell someone.
Reporting suspected child abuse can feel very scary. However, as a
caregiver, the Child, Youth and Family Enhancement Act states that it is a
legal duty to report any suspicion of abuse as soon as it is identified to your
immediate supervisor or to Child and Family Services.  Each disclosure is
dealt with on an individual basis. The responsibility for investigation and
follow-up lies with Child and Family Services and/or police. Cases will be
prioritized and responded to by Child and Family Services and/or police
depending on the urgent nature of the report.
After making a verbal report to the school authorities, you may want to jot
down some notes: the date and place of your conversation with the child is
important, and details on what the child has reported using the actual words
the child used.
You may never know what happens to the child after you report. This is one
of the hardest things to deal with when you report abuse. It is important to
look after yourself and talk to a trusted friend or counsellor about your own
feelings when you are involved in child abuse disclosures and reporting.

63 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

The Language of Health and Wellness – Medical Speak

In order to be well-informed consumers of health and wellness, it is
important to understand some health care terminology. Have you ever heard
someone describing a medical condition or treatment with words that
sounded like a foreign language? It might help your understanding to know a
few common medical prefixes and suffixes.

Prefix
(before a word)
Meaning Examples
a
absent, deficient, lack
of
atrophy: occurs when a tissue
gets smaller
adipo fat adipose tissue: body fat
bronchi
refers to the air
passages in the lungs
bronchitis: inflammation of the
air passages
cephal head
hydrocephalus: a condition with
excess fluid in the brain
ecto outside or external
ectocornea: the external layer
of the cornea
endo within or internal
endometrium: the inner lining
of the uterus
epi
on, upon, at outer,
covering
epidermis: outer layer of skin
hetero different, other
One X and one Y chromosome
constitute a heteromorphic pair.
homo same
Two X chromosomes constitute
a homomorphic pair.
hydro water
hydrotherapy: the therapeutic
use of water
intra inside, within

intramuscular injection: an
injection given into the muscle

HSS 1010 | Health Services Foundations 64

Prefix
(before a word)
Meaning Examples
infra below
infraspinatus muscle: muscle
that originates below the
muscle of the scapula
lipo fat
liposuction: a procedure to
remove fat cells
macro large
macroscopic: large enough to
be observed by the naked eye
micro small
microscopic: so small as to be
invisible without the use of a
microscope
morph form or structure
morphology: the study of the
form and structure of organisms
myo muscle
myopathies: neuromuscular
disorders in which the primary
symptom is muscle weakness
neuro nerve
neuromuscular disorders:
disorders that result from a
breakdown of the nervous
system causing deterioration of
the muscle
osteo bone
osteoarthritis: a condition of the
bones that causes pain in the
joints
peri around
pericardium: covering around
the heart
pneumo

air

pneumothorax: occurs when
there is a puncture in the cavity
around the lungs

65 Health Services Foundations | HSS 1010

Suffix
at the end of a
word)
Meaning Examples
cyte cell
monocyte: a large white blood
cell
cide destroy
spermicides: substances used
to kill sperm
itis inflammation
arthritis: an inflammation of a
joint
ology study of something biology: the study of life
osis
indicates an increase in
a state or condition
prognosis: the predicted course
of a disease
oma
indication of a tumour
or mass
carcinoma: a cancerous tumour
stomy surgical opening
colostomy: the opening of the
colon for surgery
plasty reconstruction
rhinoplasty: the reconstruction
of the nose

Congratulations, you have completed HSS1010:Health Services Foundations.
In this course, you were challenged to examine fundamental attitudes,
knowledge, and skills in preparation for further study in health, recreation,
or community services. You reviewed concepts related to
• determinants of health
• dimensions of wellness
• basic principles of anatomy, physiology, and disease
• basic safety and reporting protocols for providing care to individuals in
health, recreation, volunteer, and community-support settings
Hopefully, you acquired a greater appreciation of the human body, its
workings, and what it takes to look after your own body now and into your
future!
Turn to your Assignment Booklet and complete questions 1 – 7 in

Section 4: Public Health.
