(integrates data from sensory neuron and relays signals to
motor neurons) → motor neurons (convey nerve impulses
from the spinal cord to skeletal muscles in the arm and
hand) → skeletal muscles respond (drop hammer)
9. Spinal nerves are connected to the spinal cord (see Figure
11.23 on page 386 of the student textbook). Each spinal
nerve contains sensory fibres that conduct impulses to the
spinal cord from sensory receptors when a stimulus is
applied. The sensory impulses travel up the spinal cord to
the brain to process the information. However, if the
spinal cord is damaged, the sensory information cannot
get to the brain and the person does not detect any
sensory stimuli applied below the injured area.
10. Compare to Figure 11.6 on page 369 of the student
textbook. 
11. The CNS is composed of two types of nervous tissue—
grey matter and white matter. Grey matter is nervous
tissue characterized by many nerve cell bodies and
unmyelinated axons. White matter is composed of axonal
nerve fibres, covered by a myelin sheath. In the brain, the
white matter forms a central core and the grey matter
forms a layer on the outside.  In the spinal cord, the white
matter is on the outside and the grey matter forms an H-
shaped core. The myelinated axons in white matter run
together in tracts and take nerve impulses to and from the
brain. The grey matter includes regions of the brain
involved in muscle control; sensory perceptions, such as
seeing and hearing; memory; emotions; and speech. 
12. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a disease of the “white matter”
tissue. The white matter is made up of myelinated nerve
fibres responsible for transmitting communication signals
both within the CNS and between the CNS and the
nerves supplying the rest of the body. People with MS can
experience partial or complete loss of any function that is
controlled by, or passes through, the brain or spinal cord.
13. The diagram should resemble Figure 11.12 found on page
374. Yellow circles represent Na
+ and green circles
represent K+; yellow openings in the membrane represent
Na+ ion channels and green openings represent K+ ion
channels. The diagram should indicate that when a
neuron is at rest, the outside of the membrane of the
neuron is positively charged compared to the inside,
which is at –70 mV . This is the result of the uneven
distribution of positively and negatively charged ions. The
diagram should show that outside the cell there is a high
concentration of sodium (Na
+) ions and a lower
concentration of potassium (K+) ions. Inside the cell there
is a high concentration of K+ and a lower concentration of
Na+, as well as negatively charged ions such as chloride
(Cl–) and proteins (not shown in Figure 11.12). A neuron
achieves this state in 3 ways: proteins and chloride ions
(Cl
–) are trapped inside the cell and unable to diffuse out
through the selectively permeable cell membrane; special
membrane proteins can use the energy of ATP to pump
charged particles across the membrane, but they move out
3 sodium ions for every 2 potassium ions pumped into
the cell; and more ion-specific channels allow potassium
ions to diffuse down their concentration gradient and out
of the cell than channels allowing sodium ions to move
into the cell. 
14. The diagram of depolarization and the action potential
should be similar to Figure 11.13 on page 376. When a
neuron receives a stimulus, a wave of depolarization is
triggered. When this occurs, the gates of the K
+ channels
close and the gates of the Na+ channels open. The
number of channels that will open varies depending upon
the strength of the stimulus. Sodium ions move into the
axon until the charge inside the neuron reaches –55 mV;
this is called the threshold potential. When the threshold
potential is reached, large numbers of sodium ion
channels open, causing the inside of the neuron to
become positively charged at +35 mV . This change in 
Label Structure Functions
A sensory
neuron
takes messages from sensory receptors
to the central nervous system
B interneuron ■ receives input from sensory neurons
and other interneurons in the CNS
■ sums up all messages received from
these neurons before
communicating with motor neurons
C motor
neuron
carries messages from the CNS to an
effector (another neuron, muscle, or
gland)
D sensory
receptor 
responds to specific stimuli, i.e., pain,
temperature, pressure
E cell body contains the nucleus as well as the
other organelles required to keep the
cell functioning 
F dendrite receives signals from other neurons and
sends them to the cell body
G axon conducts nerve impulses away from the
cell body toward other neurons or other
effectors
H Schwann
cell
forms the myelin sheath to protect the
axon
I node of
Ranvier
appears as a gap where there is no
myelin sheath; is involved in the
saltatory conduction of the nerve
impulse in myelinated neurons
J effector
(muscle) 
carries out responses to motor impulses
5-38 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems