K-9 cart, for example, can cost over $500 U.S. while a
Quad Wheelchair for dogs can cost nearly $1000 U.S.
Chapter 11: Review Answers
Student Textbook pages 402–403
Answers to Understanding Concepts Questions
1. The following is a possible flow diagram showing the
main divisions of the nervous system.
The central nervous system, composed of the brain and
spinal cord, communicates with the peripheral nervous
system, which contains the nerves. In the somatic system,
nerves conduct impulses from sensory receptors to the
central nervous system and motor impulses from the
central nervous system to the skeletal muscles. In the
autonomic system, consisting of the sympathetic and
parasympathetic divisions, motor impulses travel to
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and the glands.
2. If the right side of the motor cortex were damaged, the
left side of the body would be affected. The right and left
hemispheres communicate through nerve fibre bundles
that cross from one side of the body to the other (through
the corpus callosum). As a result, the right side of the
brain controls the left side of the body and vice versa.
3.
4. The sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous
system sets off the fight-or-flight reaction that prepares
the body to deal with an immediate threat. When this
system is stimulated, heart rate and breathing rate increase
and glucose is released from the liver into the
bloodstream. These reactions are designed to deliver more
oxygen and glucose to the skeletal muscles to provide the
energy required to deal with the threat.
The parasympathetic division has an effect opposite to
that of the sympathetic nervous system. When a threat
has passed, the nerves of this system slow heart rate and
breathing rate and reverse the effects of the sympathetic
nervous system.
5. Scientists think that epilepsy can be caused by an overload
of neurological electrical activities, and epileptic seizures
may spread rapidly from one hemisphere to the other by
way of the corpus callosum. Severing a part or all of the
corpus callosum greatly reduces this spread. 
6. Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that crosses a
neuromuscular junction. When it binds to the receptor
proteins in a muscle cell membrane, acetylcholine causes
depolarization and contraction of the muscle fibre. An
enzyme called cholinesterase is released into a synapse,
where it breaks down acetylcholine. Cholinesterase is one
of the fastest acting enzymes; it breaks down acetylcholine
so that it can be removed from the protein receptors, thus
allowing the ion channels to close and the membrane to
repolarize in a fraction of a second.
7. If a person complains of a noticeable decrease in muscle
coordination after an injury, one might expect that the
cerebellum was damaged. The cerebellum sends motor
impulses by way of the brain stem to the skeletal muscles.
It ensures that all of the muscles work together to produce
smooth, coordinated voluntary muscle movements.
Damage to the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex might
also produce those symptoms. 
8. Students’ diagrams should represent a reflex arc as shown
in Figure 11.8 on page 370. The diagram should indicate
the following pathway:
pain receptor (stimulated by hammer) → sensory neuron
(takes impulse to the spinal cord) → interneuron 
Label Structure Brain functions that may be affected 
B occipital
lobe
■ vision
C frontal lobe ■ ability to move specific skeletal
muscles (depends on the exact
location of the stroke)
■ memory
■ ability to speak 
D temporal
lobe
■ hearing and/or ability to understand
speech
Label Structure Brain functions that may be affected 
A parietal lobe ■ ability to distinguish specific
sensations (depends on the exact
location of the stroke) 
brain spinal cord
cranial nerves
sensory neurons
somatic nervous system
sympathetic nervous system parasympathetic nervous system
autonomic nervous system
motor neurons
spinal nerves
Peripheral Nervous System
Central Nervous System
5-37Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR