(c) visual information (occipital lobe) → somatosensory
area of the cerebral cortex → impulse from motor
cortex → spinal cord → impulse travels down motor
neuron of the peripheral nervous system → skeletal
muscles in the arm contract
(d) Potential applications for this technology include
providing so-called “intelligent” prosthetic devices for
a person whose arm or leg has been amputated or
whose motor function has been lost or impaired due
to a spinal cord injury.
(e) The answer to this question will depend on the
students’ point of view. Some feel it is unethical to do
any type of testing using animals. Others may feel
that animal testing that provides a direct benefit to
humans is acceptable.
20. There are two reasons why an action potential can travel
in only one direction along the axon. The first reason is
related to the depolarization and repolarization of the
neural membrane and is explained below:
■  An action potential generates local currents that tend to
depolarize the membrane of the neuron immediately
adjacent to the action potential. 
■  When depolarization caused by local currents reaches
threshold levels, a new action potential is produced
adjacent to the original one. 
■  Action potential propagation occurs in one direction
because the recently depolarized area of the neural
membrane is in an absolute refractory period and
cannot generate an action potential.
The second reason is that nerve impulses can travel only
from the axon of one neuron to the dendrite(s) of the
next neuron. This can be explained as follows:
■  The synapse is the gap between the axon of the first
(presynaptic) neuron and the dendrite(s) of the second
(postsynaptic) neuron.
■  The end of every axon ends in a bulb. 
■  After an action potential arrives at the axon bulb,
synaptic vesicles fuse with the membrane of the
presynaptic neuron.
■  Neurotransmitter molecules are released into the
synapse and bind to receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane.
■  When a stimulatory neurotransmitter binds to a
receptor on the postsynaptic membrane, an action
potential is generated in the dendrites of the second
neuron.
Nerve impulses travelling in both directions would be
similar to vehicles going in both directions in the same
lane of a freeway. It would be chaos!
21. (a) A stimulus large enough to cause the neuron to reach
threshold potential is what starts the action potential
in the neuron.
(b) This demonstrates part of the all-or-none response—
the action potential is either generated by the
stimulus or it isn’t (just like the domino either falls or
it doesn’t).
(c) This would be described as the propagation of the
action potential along the neuron in a real neuron.
(d) The impulse travels in one direction in a neuron as
well.
(e) This event is also explained by the all-or-none
response in a neuron. An axon cannot respond with a
mild or a strong response; it can only respond or not
respond. A stimulus that is strong enough to produce
the threshold potential in the neuron will generate an
action potential.
Answers to Making Connections Questions
22. T esting the blood would not provide any information
about the meninges because of the blood-brain barrier.
The meninges protect the central nervous system by
preventing the direct circulation of blood through the
cells of the brain and spinal cord. This separation of the
blood and central nervous system is called the blood-brain
barrier. T esting of the cerebrospinal fluid for the bacteria
that cause meningitis, on the other hand, would provide
the needed information. The cerebrospinal fluid
transports hormones, white blood cells, and nutrients
across the blood-brain barrier for cells of the brain and
spinal cord. It also circulates between two layers of the
meninges, the arachnoid and pia mater. The bacteria that
cause meningitis would be found in this fluid.
23. The threshold potential is the minimum change in the
membrane potential that is required to generate an action
potential in a neuron (e.g., from –70 mV to –55 mV in
mammals). People with a higher tolerance to pain must
have sensory neurons that require a greater stimulus in
order for the neurons to achieve the threshold potential
than do those people with a lower tolerance for pain.
24. Acetylcholine is one of the prominent neurotransmitters
of the somatic and the parasympathetic nervous systems.
If botulinum toxin inhibits acetylcholine, the
neurotransmitter that relays nerve signals to muscles, the
nerves will be prevented from signalling the muscles to
contract. The result is weakness and paralysis that
descends from the cranium down, affecting, among other
things, the muscles that regulate breathing.
5-40 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems