charge is called the action potential. The depolarization of
one part of the axon causes the Na + channels in the
neighbouring region of the axon to open, and this
depolarization continues along the length of the axon. 
The diagram showing repolarization should resemble
Figure 11.14 on page 376. Any specific region of the axon
is only depolarized for a split second. Almost immediately
after the Na
+ channels open, the gates of the K + channels
re-open and K+ ions move out of the neuron. The Na+
channels close at the same time. This process, combined
with rapid active transport of Na
+ ions out of the axon by
the Na+/K+ ion pump, reestablishes the polarity of that
region of the axon. 
15. The axons of some neurons are enclosed in a fatty,
insulating layer called the myelin sheath. (Schwann cells
form the myelin sheath by wrapping themselves around
the axon.) The myelin sheath is segmented, i.e., not a
continuous layer like the plastic insulation surrounding a
copper wire. Gaps, called nodes of Ranvier, exist between
segments of myelin. A saltatory conduction takes place
when the action potentials jump from one node of
Ranvier to the next node. (“Saltatory” comes from the
Latin word meaning to leap.)
The action potentials in an unmyelinated neuron
occur all along the axon. Therefore, they occur beside one
another. As a result of so many action potentials occurring
all along the axon, the transmission of an impulse along
an unmyelinated axon is much slower than the saltatory
conduction along a myelinated axon.
16. If the neurotransmitter has an inhibitory effect, the
receptor protein will trigger hyperpolarization of the
membrane. This means that the inside of the axon will
become even more negatively charged. As a result, the
membrane will not depolarize and there is no action
potential.
Answers to Applying Concepts Questions
17. (a) (Note: Make sure students understand that this
question is asking about threshold potential of the
neuron, not the threshold level of the size of the
stimulus. It would be better to use the term
“threshold” only for threshold potential here.)
Threshold potential is the minimum change in the
membrane potential that will allow an action
potential to be generated; in mammals, the stimulus
has to be strong enough to cause enough sodium
channels to open to change the inside voltage of the
neuron to at least –55 mV . In this neuron, the
minimum size of the stimulus required for the neuron
to reach threshold potential is 2 mV . (Note: Accept a
student’s answer with any voltage greater than 1 mV
but less than or equal to 2 mV .) 
(b) An axon is governed by the all-or-none principle. If
an axon is stimulated sufficiently (above the threshold
potential), the axon will trigger an impulse down the
length of the axon. The strength of the response is
uniform along the entire length of the axon. Also, the
strength of response in a single neuron is independent
of the strength of the stimulus. An axon cannot send
a mild or a strong response; it can only respond or
not respond. Increasing the strength of the stimulus
will not affect the amount of mass that the muscle
can lift. The muscle will lift a mass of 10 g no matter
what the size of the stimulus is.
(c) An example of a sensory neuron is one that leads
from a pain receptor in the finger to the spinal cord.
A pin can be pressed against the skin without eliciting
a response from the pain receptor; therefore an
impulse is not generated in the sensory neuron. In
other words, the size of the stimulus is not sufficient
to cause the neuron to reach the threshold potential.
However, if the pin is lightly jabbed into the finger,
the pain receptor may be stimulated and an action
potential generated in the sensory neuron heading
toward the spinal cord. In other words, a threshold
potential stimulus is applied and an action potential is
generated in the neuron. If the pin is rammed into
the finger, that one pain receptor responds and an
action potential is generated in the sensory neuron.
However, the strength of the action potential in that
one neuron would be exactly the same. A neuron
cannot send a mild or a strong response; it can only
respond or not respond (all-or-none principle). The
person would likely sense a greater level of pain in the
last scenario, but that response would be due to more
pain receptors being stimulated, thus generating
action potentials in more neurons.
18. The frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex is most related to
memory. Students’ answers could name three other
functions for this lobe from the following: conscious
thought, intelligence, personality, voluntary muscle
movements, and motor speech (Broca’s area). One of the
characteristics of Alzheimer’s disease is the loss of short-
term memory. 
19. (a) The primary motor area in the frontal lobe would
direct the movement of the robotic arm. 
(b) Neural pathway: visual information (occipital lobe)
→ somatosensory area of the cerebral cortex →
impulse from motor cortex → spinal cord → impulse
travels down wires of robotic arm → skeletal muscles
in robotic arm contract. Students should also note
that the cerebellum coordinates the muscle
movements ordered by the motor cortex. 
Sensors in the artificial limb send messages back
through wires to the spinal cord. Myelinated neurons
in the spinal cord transmit this sensory information
to the cerebellum and the parietal lobe of the brain.
These impulses are interpreted in these areas so the
monkey knows where and how its artificial arm is
moving and what position it is in. This feedback
results in smooth, coordinated motion.
5-39Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR