SLIDE 35
Is it possible for a person to be genetically male but anatomically female? Vice versa?  

SLIDE 36
Reproductive Technologies
Technologies to support conception
In-vitro fertilization (IVF)
involves retrieving eggs from a woman's ovaries and fertilizing them with sperm in a laboratory setting. The resulting embryos are then transferred directly into the woman's uterus, aiming to achieve pregnancy.

SLIDE 37


SLIDE 38
Reproductive Technologies
Technologies to support conception
Fertility Drugs
medications used to stimulate ovulation and enhance the chances of conception in individuals facing fertility issues. They work by regulating hormones to promote the development of multiple eggs, increasing the likelihood of successful fertilization and pregnancy
Typically a prerequisite step for successful IVF
E.g. 
Clomiphene citrate. Taken by mouth, this drug stimulates ovulation by causing the pituitary gland to release more follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), which stimulate the growth of an ovarian follicle containing an egg. 

SLIDE 39
Reproductive Technologies
Technologies to support conception
Artificial Insemination
fertility treatment that involves directly inserting sperm into a woman's reproductive tract to facilitate conception without sexual intercourse. 

SLIDE 40
Reproductive Technologies
Technologies to prevent conception
Physical barriers (i.e. male condoms and female diaphragms)
Prevent sperm from reaching eggs
Male condoms offer additional protection against Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)
Chemical barriers (e.g. spermicide)
Kill sperm and therefore prevent them from reaching and fertilizing an egg
Lower effectiveness, typically used in 
combination
 with other methods

SLIDE 41
Negative Feedback and Hormonal contraceptives
Hormonal Contraceptives (e.g. Birth control pill, injections, Intrauterine Devices (IUDs), etc.)
Contraceptive technologies whereby artificial hormones mimic the effect of progesterone and therefore through 
negative feedback
 inhibit the release of FSH and LH from the anterior pituitary. This ultimately prevents ovulation. 
Morning After Pill (i.e. Plan B)
More intensive hormone treatment taken for emergency use
Very high dose of synthetic hormones that can prevent or delay ovulation if taken within 48 hours of intercourse

SLIDE 42
Reproductive Technologies
Technologies to prevent conception
Tubal Ligation 
Surgery that involves cutting the oviducts and tying off the cut ends. Prevents ovum from reaching sperm and the uterus.
Vasectomy 
Male equivalent to tubal ligation, whereby the vas deferens is cut and tied off. Sperm do not enter semen and leave the male body. 