538  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
Career Focus:  Ask a Sexual and Reproductive 
Health Coordinator
Wendi Lokanc-Dilizio ﬁ rmly believes that sexual health is a positive part 
of general well-being, not simply the absence of illness or disease. Her 
goal is to provide the information, motivation, and personal insight 
people need in order to develop personal skills that will support their 
positive sexual health. How to accomplish this goal is the challenge. 
“Even though Canadians have diverse values and opinions on human 
sexuality, sexual health education needs to be accessible to all people 
and it should be provided in an age-appropriate, culturally sensitive 
manner that is respectful of an individual’s right to make informed 
choices about sexual and reproductive health. That is my job.”
Q How do you deﬁ ne sexual and reproductive health?
 
First and foremost, sexual health is part of personal 
health and healthy living. It involves emotional, 
physical, mental, and social well-being. Here at the 
Calgary Health Region, our approach is two-fold: ﬁ rst, 
we want to work towards the positives such as the 
ability to develop rewarding personal relationships 
and the joy of desired parenthood; second, we want 
to help people avoid the negatives such as unwanted 
pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections.
Q Are sexually transmitted infections a signiﬁ cant 
problem?
 
Unfortunately they are, and they pose a particular 
threat to the health of speciﬁ c groups. The rates of 
infections such as chlamydia and gonorrhea are 
highest among teens and young adults, so the need for 
knowledge and information for this group is urgent. 
Neglecting to provide this education can have 
signiﬁ cant consequences. For example, untreated 
chlamydia infection could lead to pelvic inﬂ ammatory 
disease and infertility, chronic pelvic pain, ectopic 
pregnancy, and increased susceptibility to HIV infection.
Q What would a typical day at work look like for you?
 
The appeal of this job for me is that there is no typical 
day. My mornings often begin with a brief meeting 
with colleagues. When I turn to the day’s email, it can 
be a bit daunting to see the lack of basic sexual health 
knowledge that is demonstrated in the questions I 
receive through the website. The questions are often 
complex and can involve biological, emotional, 
psychological, social, economic, political, cultural, 
ethical, legal, religious, and even spiritual elements. 
It can take quite a bit of research and work on my part 
to provide the best response.
Q What motivated you to enter this ﬁ eld?
 
As a nurse, I always had an interest in community 
development and health promotion, if not speciﬁ cally 
sexual health promotion. I was fortunate to ﬁ nd a role 
model in this ﬁ eld who was absolutely passionate 
about what he did, and that had a big inﬂ uence on me.
Q What qualities do you think a person needs to do this 
kind of work?
 
Well, truthfully, this is not for everyone. Sexual health 
can be sensitive and controversial, so it requires people 
who have the personal qualities, training, and 
professional preparation that includes:
 
• biological knowledge of human sexuality and 
reproductive functions
 
• knowledge of general sexual health issues
 
• teaching and clinical skills
 
• an ability to respond respectfully to the sexual 
health education needs of diverse groups
 
• a capacity to discuss sexual health in a positive 
and sensitive manner
 
• conﬂ ict management and resolution skills
 
• an understanding of issues surrounding sexual 
orientation and gender
 
• insight to help people evaluate the ways that media 
can affect sexual health
 
• a commitment to a professional code of ethics on 
sexual health education, counselling and clinical 
services
