Connections
Social and Environmental Contexts
Social and Environmental Contexts
Chapter 15  Human Development • MHR  527
What are Stem Cells?
Stem cells are unspecialized or undifferentiated cells. This 
means that they have not yet begun to develop into red 
blood cells, muscle cells, or any other of the 200 or so cell 
types that make up the human body. 
 
Stem cells have two important features. First, they 
can replicate (make copies of themselves) for a long 
time by dividing. Second, under suitable laboratory 
conditions, stem cells can be coaxed to give rise to cells 
with special functions, such as heart muscle cells and 
neurons (nerve cells).
 
There are two main types of stem cells: adult stem 
cells (also called somatic stem cells) and embryonic stem 
cells. In spite of their name, adult stem cells are found in 
humans of all ages. In fact, one source of adult stem cells 
for medical use is the umbilical cords of newborns. Small 
numbers of these stem cells have now been found in 
many different human organs and tissues. 
 
Embryonic stem cells, as their name implies, come 
from embryos—about four or ﬁ ve days after fertilization. 
The source of embryonic stem cells has been an assisted 
reproduction technique called in vitro fertilization. In 
this process, embryos are produced in a lab; more are 
produced than are implanted in the woman who wishes 
to become pregnant. Scientists now also have the ability 
to create embryos solely for research, but many countries, 
including Canada, have banned this technique as unethical. 
 
Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent, which means 
that they can become many different types of cells in the 
human body. Until very recently, it was thought that 
adult stem cells could only give rise to the different types 
of cells in the tissues where they were found. For example, 
basic blood stem cells found in bone marrow could 
become red blood cells, white blood cells, and so on. 
However, recent research has shown that many adult 
stem cells can be made to develop into a wider range of 
specialized cells. For instance, in the laboratory, blood 
stem cells have yielded muscle cells, including heart 
muscle cells, and nerve cells. This is an exciting area of 
research for two reasons: ﬁ rst, it would avoid the ethical 
issues of embryonic stem cell research, and second, it 
could produce repair tissues from a person’s own body 
cells that would be a perfect match. 
Stem Cell Research in Canada
Working together, Alberta-born biophysicist James Till 
and Toronto physician Ernest McCulloch discovered 
stem cells in 1960. In 1992, neuroscientist Samuel Weiss 
of the University of Calgary was the ﬁ rst to show that 
adult stem cells exist in the human brain. Today, Canada 
is still in the forefront of stem cell research. Dr. Weiss, for 
example, is now researching how the brain’s stem cells 
could be used to help people who have had strokes. 
Meanwhile, researchers at the University of Alberta are 
working on a stem cell treatment for Type 1 Diabetes, 
while an Ottawa scientist is working with heart stem cells 
that could be used in the treatment of heart attacks.
 
Many important questions about stem cells still 
remain to be answered. Among them: how many different 
types of adult stem cells can be found in the human body, 
and in what tissues? What is the purpose of adult stem 
cells in the body? Why do they remain in an undifferented 
state, when all the cells around them have differentiated?
• • •
 1. One of the ﬁ rst diseases to be treated with stem cells 
was leukemia. Research what this treatment was and 
why it worked. How has the treatment changed today?
 2. Depending on their source, stem cells may be referred 
to as totipotent, pluripotent, and multipotent. What 
are the differences among these types of stem cells, 
and where are they found in the body?
 3. Some people (including some scientists) consider 
stem cell research and use objectionable. What is the 
foundation of the controversies surrounding stem 
cells? What steps has Canada taken to restrict the 
ways in which stem cell research can be performed?
Stem Cells
Imagine being able to repair human body parts with tissue grown especially for the 
purpose. For instance, people who have had heart attacks could receive new cardiac 
(heart) cells. Instead of waiting for organ transplants, people with failing livers, 
kidneys, or lungs could have healthy new organs grown for them. People who have 
lost the use of their legs through paralysis might be able to walk again with new nerve 
cells growing in their spinal cords. The key to these technological feats is stem cells. 
