528  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
 1. In what ways does the fetal period of development differ 
from the embryonic period of development?
 2. During which trimester do the following events occur?
a) heart starts beating
b) the body is larger in proportion to the head
c) fatty tissues are deposited beneath the skin
d) brain cells are connecting to form more intricate 
networks
e) external reproductive organs are distinguishable 
as male or female
f) eyelashes form
g) contractions felt by the mother signal the onset 
of labour
h) skin appears wrinkled
i) nervous system starts to function
j) external reproductive organs are present but not 
distinguishable as male or female
k) the fetus produces urine
l) the fetus adopts the “fetal position”
m) blood cells and major blood vessels start to form
n) the head is larger in proportion to the body
 3. a) Which of the following is not a teratogen: x-rays, 
folic acid, alcohol, mercury, HIV, nicotine, 
tetracycline (an antibiotic), vitamin C?
 
 b) Explain why the answer you chose in (a) is not 
a teratogen and why the others are.
 4. What is parturition?
 5. a) How many stages of parturition are there?
 
 b) Describe what occurs during each of these stages.
 6. Describe two hormonal changes that occur in the 
mother’s body as parturition occurs.
 7. Outline how hormones are involved in lactation and 
the suckling reﬂ ex. ICT
ICT
 8. In the traditional birthing practices of Inuit women, the 
women increased their consumption of caribou, char, 
muktuk (whale blubber and skin), and seal, and they 
limited their intake of berries. They did not eat any aged 
food. (Source: Midwifery and Aboriginal Midwifery in 
Canada, National Aboriginal Health Organization, 
2004, p. 24.) Infer at least two reasons for these food 
choices and omissions.
Review
Section  15.2
deposited beneath the skin to help 
insulate the newborn, and the fetus 
kicks, stretches, and moves freely 
within the amniotic sac.
• Teratogens are factors that can 
adversely affect the health of a fetus. 
• Examples of teratogens include alcohol, 
tobacco, illegal drugs (such as cocaine), 
environmental toxins (such as 
pesticides), maternal infections (such 
as chicken pox and measles), lack of 
nutrients (especially folic acid), and 
too much of certain nutrients (such 
as vitamin C).
• The hormones oxytocin and 
prostaglandins help to stimulate 
uterine contractions, assisting the 
movement of the fetus in the process 
of parturition. 
• The stimulus of suckling results in 
the secretion of oxytocin from the 
posterior pituitary, stimulating the 
contraction of the milk glands and 
ducts for lactation.
