Chapter 15  Human Development • MHR  539
Other Careers Related to Sexual and Reproductive Health Promotion
Teachers and Other Educators People from a variety of 
educational backgrounds provide sexual health education 
through schools, colleges, universities, health care settings, 
public health programs, social service agencies, as well as 
community and religious organizations. Whether in an 
academic or a community setting, educators provide 
students with information, motivation and self-esteem, and 
teach them the skills necessary to maintain sexual health.
Community and Public Health Workers Practitioners 
in community and public health work to promote positive 
lifestyles and create a supportive environment for 
prevention of disease and protection of health. Sexual 
health education is an integral part of public health and 
addresses the broader environmental and lifestyle factors 
that can impact public health. A degree in social work, 
nursing, or a relevant college certiﬁ cate of diploma is 
generally required to work in the community health ﬁ eld.
Clinical Counsellor or Therapist Counsellors and 
therapists teach individuals to feel positive about 
themselves by providing them with the opportunity to 
develop the knowledge, personal insight, motivation and 
behavioural and decision making skills that are consistent 
with each individual’s personal values. Some therapists are 
self-employed practitioners, while others work in hospitals 
or clinics. A graduate degree is generally required to work 
as a clinical counsellor or therapist.
Peer education and counselling Peers can have a 
signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence on behaviour. Trained volunteers 
in the high school, university and college setting are an 
effective source of sexual health education. Individuals 
involved in peer education are trained speciﬁ cally for their 
role and are carefully supervised by professionals. No 
formal degree or certiﬁ cate is required to be a peer counsellor.
Go Further…
 1. Discuss how socio-economic or 
environmental factors such as income, 
social environment, education levels, and 
access to services affect sexual health.
 2. What segments of our society might require 
speciﬁ c sexual health education? Discuss 
the challenges and issues and suggest ways 
in which society could meet their needs.
 3. Mass media exerts a strong inﬂ uence on 
sexual behaviour. How can individuals 
critically evaluate what they see, hear, and 
read in the media about sexual norms and 
practices?
