Chapter 15  Human Development • MHR  533
technologies can select the sex of their 
babies. As well, zygotes can be tested for 
a number of genetic disorders before 
being implanted. As genetic screening 
becomes ever more sophisticated, 
ethical and moral questions arise about 
the extent to which people should be 
able to “design” their children. (You will 
explore some of these questions in more 
depth in Chapter 18.)
• Does everybody have the right to 
be a parent? Should reproductive 
technologies (which can be very 
expensive) be available only to 
individuals who are able to pay for 
them, or should they be funded by the 
People who seek to enhance their ability to conceive or to 
prevent it require advice from qualiﬁ ed health professionals 
to determine the best course of action for their particular 
situations. Many factors are involved in making this 
determination. Two of these factors are the safety of 
any given available technology and its effectiveness.
 
These two factors, safety and effectiveness, require further 
elaboration to clarify their meaning. For example, to what or 
to whom does safety refer: the person undergoing treatment, 
the embryo/fetus, or both? What does effectiveness mean, 
and how is it to be quantiﬁ ed? How reliable is the method 
used to quantify it?
 
In this Thought Lab, you will gather information and data 
to assess and evaluate the safety and effectiveness of various 
technologies for enhancing and preventing conception. 
Based on your ﬁ ndings, you will offer and justify an opinion 
about the effectiveness and safety of these technologies.
Procedure
 1. Working in small groups, select at least three of the 
technologies from each column of the following lists. 
(Therefore, you will select a minimum of six technologies.)
Selected Technologies for 
Enhancing Conception
Selected Technologies for 
Preventing Conception
• artiﬁ cial insemination (AI)
• assisted hatching (also 
called laser assisted 
hatching)
• gamete intrafallopian 
transfer (GIFT)
• in vitro fertilization (IVF)
• intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection (ICSI)
• surrogacy
• tubal embryo transfer 
(TET)
• zygote intrafallopian 
transfer (ZIFT)
• condoms
• fertility awareness methods 
• intrauterine device (IUD)
• lactational amenorrhea 
(LAM)
• oral contraceptives (pills 
containing both estrogen 
and progestin (synthetic 
progesterone))
• progestin-only 
contraceptives
• spermicides
• tubal ligation
• vasectomy
 2. With the members of your group, discuss the meanings 
of the terms “safety” and “effectiveness” as they apply to 
reproductive technologies. Develop preliminary 
deﬁ nitions for these terms.
 3. Conduct research to ﬁ nd data or information about the 
safety and effectiveness of each of the technologies you 
have selected. ICT
ICT
 4. In the course of your research, you may ﬁ nd that your 
deﬁ nitions of the terms “safety” and “effectiveness” 
require modiﬁ cation or replacement. Redeﬁ ne these 
terms with the members of your group. Then consult 
with other groups to compare deﬁ nitions. As a class, 
develop deﬁ nitions that everyone can agree to use. ICT
ICT
 5. Reexamine the information and data you have 
gathered in light of the class deﬁ nitions of safety and 
effectiveness. As necessary, conduct additional research 
to reﬁ ne your ﬁ ndings. ICT
ICT
 6. Consult with other groups to prepare a master chart that 
summarizes ﬁ ndings for all the technologies investigated.
Analysis
 1. Based on your research, what key factors inﬂ uenced your 
deﬁ nitions of “safety” and “effectiveness”? List them in 
order of priority. What seems to be considered an 
acceptable risk to take to conceive or prevent 
conception of a child?
 2. Based on your research and the summary in the master 
chart, decide which conception-enhancing and which 
conception-preventing technology is the most safe and 
effective technology. Use clear and logical arguments to 
justify your opinion. (You may answer this question as a 
group, as an individual, or both.)
Extension
 3. List three other factors that you think would affect a 
person’s or a couple’s determination of the best course 
of action for enhancing or preventing conception.
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
15.2
Evaluating Reproductive 
Technologies: Safety and Effectiveness
T a r g e t  S k i l l s
Evaluating, from published data, the 
effectiveness and safety of various 
reproductive technologies
Justifying, through the use of clear 
and logical arguments, a decision about 
the effectiveness and safety of 
reproductive technologies
