530  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
Artiﬁ cial Insemination
Artiﬁ cial insemination (AI) has been used 
for decades as a way to promote breeding 
success among domestic animals. It had 
also been used by human couples for years, 
before the ﬁ rst success of IVF. Artiﬁ cial 
insemination continues to be reﬁ ned and 
is still useful when the man is sterile or 
infertile. In artiﬁ cial insemination, sperm 
are collected and concentrated before 
being placed in the woman’s vagina. In 
some cases, the sperm are donated by the 
woman’s male partner. In other cases, the 
sperm are from a stranger. Sperm banks 
provide a source of sperm samples that 
have been gathered for this purpose. 
In Vitro Fertilization
As in the case of Leslie Brown, IVF offers 
a solution for women with blocked 
oviducts. Today, ultrasound machines are 
used to identify speciﬁ c follicles that are 
close to ovulation. Immature eggs can be 
retrieved directly from these follicles. 
The eggs are combined with sperm in 
laboratory glassware (see Figure 15.17). 
After fertilization, the developing embryo 
is placed in the uterus. A slight variation 
on IVF is Gamete Intrafallopian Transfer 
(GIFT), in which the eggs and sperm are 
brought together in the oviduct rather 
than in vitro. This procedure has a higher 
success rate than IVF.
Figure 15.17  In a variation of in vitro fertilization, performed when a sperm is 
unable to penetrate the egg in vitro, sperm may be injected into the egg—a 
technique called intracytoplasmic sperm injection. It is used to help men with 
very low sperm counts, high numbers of abnormal sperm, or injuries or 
illnesses that prevent men from providing a sperm sample through ejaculation.
Surrogate Mothers
Sometimes, an infertile couple contracts 
another woman to carry a baby for them. 
The woman who carries the baby is 
called the surrogate mother. Using AI 
or IVF, one or both gametes may be 
contributed by the contracting couple.
Superovulation
Superovulation is the production of 
multiple eggs as a result of hormone 
treatment. Women who ovulate rarely 
or not at all may receive treatment 
with hormones that stimulate follicle 
development and ovulation. 
Superovulation is also often used 
in conjunction with other artiﬁ cial 
reproductive technologies.
2
  Give two reasons that a man 
might be infertilie or sterile, 
and identify two reproductive 
technologies that could help.
2
  Give two reasons that a woman 
might be infertile or sterile, 
and identify two reproductive 
technologies that could help.
• • •
• • •
Technologies That Reduce 
Reproductive Potential
Sometimes, couples who are fertile wish 
to avoid or delay conceiving a child. Any 
behaviour or technology that prevents 
conception is a form of contraception, or 
birth control. There are several different 
forms of contraception, each with its own 
advantages and disadvantages. Some 
examples are described brieﬂ y below.
Abstinence 
The surest way to avoid conceiving 
a child is simply not to have sexual 
intercourse. Complete abstinence also 
has the important advantage of ensuring 
almost total protection from STIs. Not all 
couples, however, are willing to abstain 
entirely from a sexual relationship.
BiologyFile
 
Web Link
The space age and the 
continued presence of 
humans in space have 
spawned questions that 
would not have occurred 
to early researchers of 
reproduction. For example, 
how do sperm behave in 
microgravity conditions? 
In what ways could their 
behaviour and movement 
affect fertility? What role 
might gravity play in human 
development?
@
www
www.albertabiology.ca
