534  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
Canadian health-care system? Should a 
mother who has completed menopause 
but wants another child have the same 
access to reproductive technologies as 
a young woman who wants to start a 
family? Should access to reproductive 
technologies be limited to individuals 
or couples who meet certain criteria, 
such as age, marital status, income, and 
health? Would limiting access be unfair 
discrimination, since fertile individuals 
and couples do not have to meet similar 
criteria in order to become parents?
 
These are only a few of the legal, 
moral, and ethical questions that 
surround reproductive technologies. In 
the coming years, Canadian governments, 
courts, spiritual leaders, families, and 
individuals will continue to debate these 
and similar reproduction-related questions.
Section 15.3 Summary
• Reproductive technologies have 
been developed to assist couples in 
conceiving a child as well as assist 
couples in preventing conception. 
• People who are sterile or infertile may 
be helped by reproduction-enhancing 
technologies and practices such as 
artiﬁ cial insemination, in vitro 
fertilization (IVF), surrogate 
motherhood, and superovulation. 
• People who wish to reduce the 
likelihood of conception may beneﬁ t 
from technologies and practices such 
as abstinence, surgical procedures that 
prevent eggs from entering the uterus 
(tubal ligation) or sperm from being 
a component of semen (vasectomy), 
hormone treatments, physical barriers 
such as condoms and diaphragms, 
chemical barriers such as spermicides, 
and natural family planning (also 
called the rhythm method).
• The ability to enhance and prevent 
conception raises social and ethical 
issues that challenge individuals, 
courts, and governments to critically 
examine their views and beliefs about 
the value of human life and when that 
life begins. 
• These issues have been debated for 
decades, and they continue to be debated.
 1. For each of the following situations, suggest a 
reproductive technology that might be appropriate. 
Brieﬂ y explain your suggestion.
a) The male has a low sperm count. The female is 
reproductively healthy.
b) The male has a healthy sperm count. The female 
rarely ovulates but is otherwise reproductively healthy.
c) The male has a healthy sperm count. The female has 
blocked oviducts.
d) A male is about to undergo radiation therapy. He 
currently has no female partner, but he wants to 
have children in the future.
e) A female has no male partner but wants to conceive.
 2. Design a table to summarize at least three methods for 
enhancing reproductive potential. Your summary table 
should include the following information: name and 
description of each method, how it works, and who 
would use it. ICT
ICT
 3. Design a table to summarize at least ﬁ ve common methods 
for reducing reproductive potential (contraception). 
Your summary table should include the following 
information: name and description of each method, 
its effectiveness, how it works, and safety concerns. ICT
ICT
 4. Explain how in vitro fertilization is different from 
artiﬁ cial insemination.
 5. Brieﬂ y describe three examples of issues that have been 
raised over the technologies used to enhance and reduce 
reproductive potential.
Review
Section  15.3
