532  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
taken within 24 to 48 hours. Effectiveness 
drops signiﬁ cantly to about only 
5 percent if taken within 48 to 72 hours.
Physical or Chemical Barriers
Many contraceptive technologies are 
designed to prevent sperm from reaching 
the ovum. Physical barriers include male 
or female condoms (effectiveness about 
85 percent), a latex cap—called a 
diaphragm—that ﬁ ts over the cervix 
(effectiveness about 90 percent), and 
the contraceptive sponge (effectiveness 
ranging from about 70 to 90 percent 
depending on whether the woman has 
given birth and the care taken in using it). 
Spermicides—chemical barriers that kill 
sperm—include jellies, foams, and 
creams. Effectiveness is about 75 percent. 
Chemical barriers and physical barriers 
can be used together, which increases 
their effectiveness. Condoms have the 
additional advantage of offering some 
protection against the transmission of STIs.
Natural Family Planning
Some couples refrain from sexual 
intercourse during the time of the 
woman’s cycle when she is most fertile 
(that is, from a week before her ovulation 
to a day or two afterward). This is known 
as natural family planning or the rhythm 
method. Because a woman’s cycle can 
vary from month to month, the couple 
must pay careful attention to the subtle 
signals of the woman’s body, such as 
body temperature and the properties 
of the cervical mucus. This method is 
among the least reliable forms of birth 
control, with an effectiveness estimated 
at about 70 percent.
2
  What is the most effective method 
to avoid conceiving a child?
2
  Which technology for preventing 
conception also protects against 
the transmission of sexually 
transmitted infections?
• • •
• • •
Social and Ethical Questions
When Louise Joy Brown was born, there 
was a wave of public concerns about the 
prospect of IVF being used in “baby 
factories” to mass-produce new humans. 
These concerns have proven to be 
unfounded. Many people, however, 
remain uncomfortable with technologies 
that interfere with the natural processes 
of conception and childbirth. Individual 
reproductive technologies also raise a 
number of difﬁ cult questions, including 
the questions below: 
• What rights should a zygote have? Many 
reproductive technologies involve the 
gathering and fertilization of several 
eggs. Only one or a few of the resulting 
zygotes may be implanted and carried 
to term. The rest are destroyed before 
being implanted. Although this practice 
is legal in Canada, many people see the 
deliberate creation and destruction of 
human zygotes as immoral. A related 
issue is the commercialization of 
reproduction. What happens to the way 
we value human life if we buy and sell 
human gametes? 
• What rights should gamete donors and 
surrogate parents have? Should a man 
or woman who has donated gametes to 
an infertile couple have any rights as a 
parent? On the other hand, should a 
gamete donor have the right to remain 
anonymous even if the child wants to 
meet his or her biological parent? If 
a surrogate mother decides that she 
wants to keep the baby she has carried 
for another couple, should she have the 
right to break her contract? Should the 
answer be the same if her own ovum is 
used in the procedure? These and other 
legal questions continue to be tested in 
courts around the world.
• How far should reproductive 
technologies go? It is already simple to 
sort sperm into those that are likely to 
carry an X chromosome and those that 
are likely to carry a Y chromosome. 
This means that couples using artiﬁ cial 
insemination, in vitro fertilization, or 
gamete intrafallopian transfer 
