Phase 4 — The Toolkit@page{size:Letter;margin:0.65in 0.7in 0.65in;@top-left{content:string(chapter);font:9pt sans-serif;color:#5b635d}@bottom-left{content:"SPORTS PSYCHOLOGY · NEXT STEP";font:8pt sans-serif;color:#5b635d}@bottom-right{content:counter(page);font:10pt sans-serif;color:#154212}}@page:first{@top-left{content:none}}html{font-family:Arial,sans-serif;color:#171b1b;font-size:11.5pt;line-height:1.42}body{margin:0}h1,h2,h3,h4{font-family:Arial,sans-serif;line-height:1.2;color:#154212;break-after:avoid}h1{font-size:29pt;margin:0 0 18pt;string-set:chapter content()}h2{font-size:21pt;margin:0 0 13pt;bookmark-level:1}h3{font-size:15pt;margin:17pt 0 8pt;bookmark-level:2}h4{font-size:12pt;margin:14pt 0 7pt;bookmark-level:3}p{margin:0 0 8pt;orphans:3;widows:3}ul,ol{padding-left:20pt}li{margin:0 0 5pt}a{color:#146c60;text-decoration:none}.cover{break-after:page;padding-top:0.7in}.cover .kicker{font-size:10pt;letter-spacing:1pt;color:#146c60}.cover .purpose{font-size:16pt;line-height:1.45}.cover .meta{border-top:3pt solid #154212;padding-top:15pt;margin-top:30pt}.contents{break-after:page}.contents li{list-style:none;padding:8pt 0;border-bottom:0.5pt solid #d9ded8}.contents a::after{content:leader('.') target-counter(attr(href),page)}.chapter-section{break-before:auto;margin-top:24pt;padding-top:15pt;border-top:1pt solid #d9ded8}.book-section{break-before:page}.goal{padding:12pt 15pt;background:#eef6f3;border-left:3pt solid #146c60;margin:14pt 0;break-inside:avoid}.worked-example{padding:13pt 16pt;background:#faf8f2;border:0.5pt solid #e5dccb;border-left:3pt solid #a15c00;margin:15pt 0;break-inside:avoid}.worked-example h3{margin-top:0}.example-label{font-size:9pt;font-weight:bold;color:#a15c00}.learning-figure{margin:14pt 0 18pt;break-inside:avoid}.learning-figure img{max-width:100%;width:100%;height:auto;max-height:415pt;object-fit:contain}.learning-figure figcaption{font-size:10.5pt;line-height:1.4;margin:8pt 0 0}.figure-description{font-size:11.5pt}.question-box{padding:13pt 15pt;margin:14pt 0;border:0.6pt solid #c8d6cc;break-inside:avoid}.question-box h3{font-size:12pt;margin:0 0 8pt}.question-box ul{margin:5pt 0}.question-box ol{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.application{border-left:3pt solid #146c60;padding:12pt 15pt;background:#f3f8f4;break-inside:avoid;margin:14pt 0}.small{font-size:10pt;color:#5b635d}.build-step{break-before:auto;margin-top:18pt}.field{margin:12pt 0;padding:10pt 12pt;border:0.5pt solid #d9ded8;break-inside:avoid}.field h4{margin:0 0 6pt}.rubric-dimension{break-inside:avoid;border-top:2pt solid #146c60;padding:10pt 0;margin:12pt 0}.rubric-dimension p{font-size:11pt}.feedback-item{break-inside:avoid;border-top:0.5pt solid #d9ded8;padding:8pt 0}.feedback-item h3{margin-top:0}.glossary-term{break-inside:avoid;margin:10pt 0}dt{font-weight:bold;color:#154212}dd{margin:3pt 0 0}.no-answer{font-size:10pt;color:#5b635d;margin:0 0 12pt}.source{font-size:10pt;overflow-wrap:anywhere}.column{display:block}.goal-list{break-inside:avoid}NEXT STEP · SPORTS PSYCHOLOGYPhase 4 — The ToolkitUse preparation evidence, practical routines and flexible rehearsal to act usefully even when the result is uncertain.Reading and practice chapterUse this chapter beside the learning website or as a reading route through the same lessons. Save written responses in the website or the format directed by your teacher.Worked examples are labelled. Try the learner questions before checking the answer and feedback section at the end.Fictional sport, academic and artistic examples are welcome. No private health details, personal beliefs or claims of perfect confidence are needed.Newly authored Phase 4 reading chapter.ContentsThe phase case and learning goals02 · Confidence for a particular task03 · Find evidence of preparation04 · Keep useful evidence05 · Use feedback after setbacks06 · A routine you can use07 · Rehearse in a way that works for you08 · Rehearse disruption and recovery09 · Put the toolkit together10 · Decision practice11 · My Confidence and Rehearsal Toolkit12 · Written reviewFinal checkpointGlossary and sourcesAnswers and feedbackThe phase caseTaylor prepares for a school performanceTaylor is a fictional Grade 10 student preparing a short musical audition. Taylor has practised the opening phrase and can complete it accurately in several recent rehearsals. Last week, Taylor asked for feedback on a late entry, tried the agreed count and entered on time in the next practice. Taylor is still uncertain about the unfamiliar room and selection decision.
The preparation record provides three kinds of evidence. Effort: Taylor attended the planned rehearsal and worked on the difficult entry. Success: Taylor completed the opening phrase accurately. Progress: the entry became more consistent after using the agreed count. These are case facts, not a guarantee of selection. A teacher's useful feedback is, “Keep the count clear before the opening.” A global judgment such as “You are not a performer” supplies no equivalent instruction.
Taylor finds detailed mental pictures unclear. A written sequence, spoken count or storyboard may therefore be more useful for rehearsal. Just before the audition, the usual accompaniment becomes unavailable. An approved alternative is offered. Your plan should include how Taylor clarifies the new start cue, prepares and continues. A sporting parallel is preparing a familiar serve after the usual routine is interrupted. An academic parallel is explaining a graph without the expected display. Use the fictional case throughout, or choose a suitable example without sharing private information.
Your opening responseIdentify two pieces of preparation evidence in Taylor’s case and one uncertainty. What could Taylor do next without pretending the result is guaranteed?Learning goalsI can distinguish task confidence, self-efficacy and certainty about an outcome.I can explain two sources of confidence and what each can and cannot establish.I can distinguish effort, success and progress in a preparation record.I can separate an observation, useful feedback and a global judgment.I can explain a brief C-B-A routine and adapt it to the setting.I can justify a rehearsal format and perspective without treating one as compulsory.I can rehearse a disruption and adapt when the first response does not help.I can build a coherent toolkit and adapt it when the task changes.02 · Confidence for a particular taskConfidence can be grounded in preparation without promising a result.Learning goal: I can distinguish task confidence, self-efficacy and certainty about an outcome.Before you begin: Use evidence for a particular action, not a judgment about someone’s whole worth.Confidence needs a task
A student may feel ready to explain a familiar graph but less ready to answer an unfamiliar question. A player may trust a practised pass but still be learning a new skill. Confidence is not one permanent amount that applies equally to everything a person does.
In this phase, useful confidence means a reasoned belief that preparation and available skills can support the task. Self-efficacy is belief in the ability to carry out a particular action or meet a particular demand. Both should be discussed with a clear setting and evidence.
Separate readiness from certainty
Certainty means treating something as settled or guaranteed. Confidence does not require certainty about the final result. An audition decision depends on more than one performer. An opponent, a judging decision or changing conditions may affect an outcome.
Taylor can identify evidence for the opening phrase while remaining uncertain about selection. That is not a contradiction. “I have practised my entry and know the first cue” is a supported statement. “I am certain I will be selected” makes a different claim, which the practice record cannot establish.
Use a believable statement
A believable confidence statement connects evidence to an action. It does not need to sound dramatic. “I corrected the starting count in rehearsal, and I can use that count again” names preparation and a next step. The performer may still feel nervous or unsure.
An empty affirmation lacks that connection. “I am unbeatable” may sound strong, but it does not identify what the performer can do. It can also make an ordinary error seem inconsistent with the statement. A useful plan leaves room to respond when a result differs from the hope.
Confidence is not arrogance or personal worth
Confidence in a task does not require claiming superiority over other people. A performer can recognize strengths, accept instruction and notice a gap in preparation. Being willing to use feedback is compatible with a clear belief in a learned skill.
Likewise, an uncertain performance does not determine personal worth. A student can be developing a skill without being a lesser person. The assignment assesses the quality of the explanation and plan, not how confident the learner claims to feel.
Begin with two questions
Ask, “What evidence supports readiness?” and “What remains uncertain?” The first question identifies useful resources. The second prevents an unsupported guarantee. Together, they lead to a practical response: use what is prepared, clarify what is unclear and plan an adjustment if needed.
Later lessons develop sources of confidence, useful feedback and rehearsal. None replaces the task itself or removes all uncertainty before action.
Worked example · fictional casePrepared, but not promisedTaylor has completed the opening accurately in several rehearsals and improved the starting count. Those observations support readiness for that part of the audition. They do not establish the selection decision or every response in an unfamiliar room.
A believable statement is, “I have practised the entry. I will use the agreed count and listen for the starting cue.” The statement connects preparation to action. Taylor does not have to claim complete confidence or deny uncertainty to use it.
Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.02.1 · Which statement describes task-specific self-efficacy?I am certain every judge will choose me.I am better than every other student.I believe I can use the practised count for this entry.02.2 · Taylor has practised the entry but does not know the audition room. Which response fits?Use the prepared cue and clarify the starting arrangement.Wait until all uncertainty disappears before preparing.Treat the unfamiliar room as proof that practice has no value.Confidence without a guaranteeWhat evidence supports readiness for this task? What remains uncertain?Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.03 · Find evidence of preparationChoose sources that support the task, then state their limits.Learning goal: I can explain two sources of confidence and what each can and cannot establish.Before you begin: Evidence is useful when it connects to the particular skill or demand.Not all encouragement is the same evidence
A performer may hear praise, remember a successful attempt, watch a model or rehearse a sequence. Each can contribute differently to preparation. A useful confidence plan explains the source rather than collecting encouraging statements without a purpose.
Readiness can draw on past performance, learning from others, feedback, rehearsal and physical or mental preparation. These are ways to organize a discussion of readiness. They are not points in a formula that calculates how confident a student should feel.
Direct experience with the task
Mastery experience means evidence from carrying out a task or developing a skill. Taylor's accurate opening phrase is directly relevant to performing that phrase again. Several suitable observations can be more informative than one isolated success.
Keep the conditions in view. A successful quiet rehearsal does not guarantee the same result in every setting. Ask what was similar, what was different and which part of the action was actually demonstrated. Evidence can be useful while still having limits.
Learning from a model
Modelling means observing how another person performs or prepares. A demonstration can make the sequence clearer. A peer who explains how they learned a difficult entry may also provide a practical strategy to try.
Watching is not the same as demonstrating the skill yourself. A model supplies information and a possible route to practice. The learner still needs an opportunity to understand, attempt and review the action. “Someone else can do it” does not prove that every detail will transfer automatically.
Feedback and encouragement
Useful feedback names a feature of the work and a possible adjustment. “Keep the starting count clear” gives Taylor a task. “You are amazing” may encourage, but it supplies less information about the entry.
Consider whether feedback is specific, relevant and appropriate. A confident-sounding comment can still be inaccurate. Clarify uncertain advice with a suitable teacher or coach rather than treating every outside statement as equally helpful.
Preparation and rehearsal
Having materials ready, knowing the opening cue and rehearsing a response to interruption can make a plan more usable. Rehearsal may use imagery, words, sound or a walkthrough. Later topics explain how to choose the format.
Do not confuse rehearsal with proof of the final outcome. Imagining a successful performance is not the same evidence as physically demonstrating the skill. Both can be discussed without claiming they are neurologically identical.
Choose the sources that fit
For your case, select two sources and complete two sentences for each: “This supports ___” and “This cannot prove ___.” The combination creates a grounded confidence statement and identifies what still needs practice, clarification or support.
Worked example · fictional caseOne demonstration and one observationTaylor watches the teacher demonstrate the starting count. The demonstration clarifies the timing, but it does not prove Taylor can use it. Taylor then practises and enters on time in several rehearsals. That provides direct evidence for the entry under those conditions.
The two sources do different jobs. A strong explanation distinguishes them and identifies the next uncertainty: how the starting cue will be given with the alternative accompaniment.
Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.03.1 · A teacher demonstrates a preparation sequence. What does this provide most directly?Proof that the learner will perform it successfully.A model the learner can study and try.A measurement of the learner’s confidence.03.2 · Which feedback gives the performer the clearest next task?You are naturally better than everyone.You should feel certain now.Your entry was late; practise the agreed count before beginning.Choose evidence and state its limitsChoose two relevant sources of confidence. Explain what each supports and what it cannot prove.Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.04 · Keep useful evidenceRecognize effort, success and progress without turning them into guarantees.Learning goal: I can distinguish effort, success and progress in a preparation record.Before you begin: Use the supplied fictional record; you do not need to disclose personal achievements.A record can make preparation visible
A performer may remember the most recent mistake and overlook earlier learning. A short evidence record gives a fuller picture. The purpose is not to ignore errors. It is to keep relevant observations available when planning the next action.
Use an effort, success and progress record, often shortened to E-S-P. Each term asks a different question. An example may relate to more than one category, but your explanation should make the distinction clear.
Effort: what useful work was done?
Effort evidence describes an action applied to the task. Taylor attended the planned rehearsal and worked on the difficult starting count. That is more specific than “tried hard.” The action connects to a learning need.
Effort does not automatically establish improvement. A performer can work carefully and still need a clearer strategy or more guidance. Record the action honestly without treating the amount of work as proof of success or personal worth.
Success: what was accomplished?
Success evidence identifies something achieved in a particular attempt. Taylor completed the opening phrase accurately in rehearsal. State what counted as success and the conditions in which it occurred.
A single success is useful evidence, but it is not a guarantee of the next attempt. Avoid expanding “the opening was accurate” into “the whole audition is already won.” The evidence supports the part actually observed.
Progress: what changed over time?
Progress involves a comparison. Taylor's entries became more consistent after practising the count. To describe progress, identify the earlier pattern and the later pattern. Without a comparison, an achievement may be success rather than evidence of change.
A student improving the clarity of a graph explanation offers another example. The first draft states a claim without evidence; a later draft connects the claim to a relevant example. The improvement can be described even if the whole assignment is not finished.
The confidence-account metaphor
The confidence-account metaphor compares preparation evidence to deposits in an account. Treat this as a metaphor, a comparison used to explain an idea. It is not a literal psychological bank with a measured balance. A game balance cannot tell you how confident a student really is.
Useful evidence can support a believable statement. Corrective feedback also has value; it is not automatically something to keep out of the account. The next topic explains how to retain information without accepting global personal attacks.
Keep the record short and relevant
Choose one developed example in each category. Explain what it supports and one limit. You do not need a top-ten achievement list or a claim of exceptional toughness. Three clear observations can provide a more useful foundation than many vague compliments.
Worked example · fictional caseThree entries from Taylor’s caseEffort: Taylor used the rehearsal to work on the difficult count. Success: Taylor completed the opening phrase accurately. Progress: the starting entry became more consistent after the count was practised.
The entries connect to the audition task. They do not prove selection or remove the unfamiliar-room question. A useful statement is, “I have evidence for the entry and can use the count again.” That is more grounded than “Nothing can go wrong.”
FIGURE 1 · CONFIDENCE EVIDENCE AND USEFUL FEEDBACK. The confidence account is a metaphor, not a measured balance. Keep relevant evidence of effort, success and progress. Use accurate corrective feedback. Question global attacks on the whole person without denying an observed error.The confidence account is a metaphor, not a measured balance. Keep relevant evidence of effort, success and progress. Use accurate corrective feedback. Question global attacks on the whole person without denying an observed error.Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.04.1 · Which example most clearly describes progress?The entry became more consistent across several rehearsals.The learner attended one rehearsal.The performer says they are unbeatable.04.2 · How should a game’s confidence-account balance be interpreted?As a measurement of the learner’s true confidence.As a game variable illustrating an analogy.As a teacher grade for emotional control.Develop an E-S-P recordIdentify one effort, success and progress example from the supplied case. Explain why these are more useful than an empty affirmation.Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.05 · Use feedback after setbacksKeep the correction without turning an error into a verdict on the person.Learning goal: I can separate an observation, useful feedback and a global judgment.Before you begin: A realistic response acknowledges the error and identifies something worth changing.Protect confidence without blocking learning
A performer who receives criticism may want to reject all of it. Another may accept the comment as proof of personal failure. Neither response automatically identifies what the task needs. Begin by separating the information in the statement from a judgment about the person.
An observed error is a description of what happened. Useful feedback connects that observation to a relevant adjustment. A global judgment makes a broad claim about someone's worth or permanent ability. These may appear in the same conversation, so read the actual wording carefully.
Keep what can guide the next action
“The entry was late” is an observation. “Use the agreed count before beginning” is a possible correction. “You are not a performer” is a global judgment. The last statement does not offer the same practical information as the first two.
A useful interpretation keeps the error visible. It does not rewrite the late entry as a perfect performance. Instead, it asks what can be learned and which action fits. Feedback may need clarification when it is vague or when the performer does not understand the suggested change.
Avoid two extremes
The first extreme is denial: “The result was not what I wanted, so I will pretend nothing needs changing.” That protects a claim of confidence at the expense of learning. The second is overgeneralization: “This attempt failed, so everything about me is a failure.” That conclusion goes beyond the evidence.
A more balanced statement is specific and limited. “I missed the agreed count on that entry. I will practise it and check the next attempt.” It acknowledges the problem and proposes an action without guaranteeing the correction will work immediately.
Reframing must remain believable
Reframing means considering a different interpretation of the same situation. A useful reframe does not invent success. It distinguishes the result from what the result can reasonably tell us.
For a presentation, “I left out the evidence for my claim” can become a revision task. For volleyball, “I rushed the setup” can lead to a preparation cue. The performer is not required to feel good about the error before using the information.
Get support when the issue is not just self-talk
Hurtful or disrespectful comments may require appropriate support. A student is not responsible for making every environment respectful through positive thinking. A suitable teacher or trusted adult can help address the situation.
In the assignment, use a fictional case and identify a support role rather than naming a real person. Explain what information or change would be requested. The goal is a practical response to the task and environment, not a test of how much criticism the learner can tolerate.
Worked example · fictional caseSeparate the three partsTaylor hears, “Your entry was late; keep the count clear. You are not a real performer.” The first part describes an attempt. The second gives a task-based correction. The final statement makes a global judgment.
Taylor can retain the count correction without accepting the judgment about identity. A respectful discussion with the teacher may be appropriate. The plan does not require pretending the entry was on time or treating all criticism as harmful.
Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.05.1 · Which statement is useful corrective feedback?You are a failure in every activity.Real performers never feel uncertain.Your entry was late; use the agreed starting count.05.2 · A performer says, “Rejecting every criticism will protect my confidence.” What is missing?Some feedback contains useful information that supports learning.Confidence requires accepting every personal attack.Any error proves the performer lacks ability.Keep useful feedbackSeparate an observed error, useful feedback and a judgment about the whole person. What should the performer change?Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.06 · A routine you can useConnect a believable statement, a useful pause and the next task cue.Learning goal: I can explain a brief C-B-A routine and adapt it to the setting.Before you begin: A routine supports preparation; it does not guarantee calmness or success.Move from preparation to action
A C-B-A routine offers a short bridge between preparation and performance. The letters stand for Cue your conviction, Breathe your body, Attach your attention. Each step offers a practical choice, not a promise about an internal state.
Use the routine with a task the performer understands. It cannot supply missing technique, replace a demonstration or decide an outside result. The performer should know when the routine starts, what each part does and how it ends with action.
C: a believable cue
“Cue your conviction” means choose a short statement grounded in preparation. “I have practised the entry; use the count” names a resource and an action. It is different from “I have already won,” which claims a result the performer cannot guarantee.
The statement should fit the task and the learner. It does not have to create a particular emotion. Useful action is possible while the performer still feels nervous or uncertain. The assessment asks for the reason behind the cue, not a report of total belief.
B: a comfortable pause when useful
“Breathe your body” can mean noticing a familiar, comfortable breath during a suitable pause. It is not an instruction to force a deep breath, hold the breath or meet a required count. One breath is not guaranteed to interrupt panic or produce an ideal performance state.
Physical practice is optional. Describe the step instead when that is more suitable. Stop if uncomfortable and follow individual guidance. Do not begin a breathing exercise during swimming, active play or another task that needs full attention. The routine must fit the actual setting.
A: attach attention to the task
Choose the information needed for the next action. Taylor may attend to the starting count or an agreed entry cue. Jordan's free throw may use a rim target. A presenter may use the main relationship in a graph.
External attention is not automatically correct in every situation. A brief internal cue may be useful during preparation, while a changing play may require a wider external scan. Explain what the chosen cue does and why it fits this particular moment.
Keep the sequence flexible
A routine is a support, not a compulsory ritual. Shorten or change it when time, instructions or available cues change. If the performer does not know where to begin, clarification comes before a confident-sounding statement.
Review the action afterward. Was the cue understood? Did the routine fit the pause? What should be adjusted? Keep these observations separate from the outcome. The routine deserves evaluation without being treated as an instant off-switch for every difficulty.
Worked example · fictional caseTaylor’s short preparationC: “I have practised the entry; use the count.” B: Taylor uses a familiar comfortable pause if useful, without forcing a breath. A: Taylor attends to the agreed starting cue and begins the opening phrase.
When the accompaniment changes, Taylor first confirms the new cue. The sequence then adapts to that information. The routine does not require Taylor to report certainty, and it does not predict the selection decision.
FIGURE 2 · C-B-A WITHOUT GUARANTEES. C: choose a believable preparation-based cue. B: use a familiar comfortable breath if appropriate during a safe pause, or another suitable pause. A: direct attention to what the next task needs. A routine does not guarantee calmness or success. There are no physiological target numbers.C: choose a believable preparation-based cue. B: use a familiar comfortable breath if appropriate during a safe pause, or another suitable pause. A: direct attention to what the next task needs. A routine does not guarantee calmness or success. There are no physiological target numbers.Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.06.1 · Which statement best fits the C step?I have practised the entry and can use the agreed count.The result is decided before I begin.I must feel completely certain before acting.06.2 · The starting instruction is unclear. What should happen before using the routine?Use stronger wording to overcome missing information.Clarify the starting cue, then adapt the routine.Force a breath until uncertainty disappears.Connect the routine to actionWrite a brief C-B-A sequence and explain why its final cue fits the task.Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.07 · Rehearse in a way that works for youChoose a representation that helps prepare the actual sequence.Learning goal: I can justify a rehearsal format and perspective without treating one as compulsory.Before you begin: You do not have to produce vivid mental pictures to complete this phase.Rehearsal represents a task
Rehearsal means preparing a sequence before using it in the intended setting. Mental imagery is one format: a performer represents aspects of an action in imagination. One metaphor for this is “mental cinema.” The metaphor can make the idea concrete, but it should not become a requirement to see a perfect internal film.
Other formats include a written sequence, spoken rehearsal, storyboard or eyes-open walkthrough. A student can explain the same preparation and recovery decisions through these formats. The choice should serve the task rather than prove an ability to create a particular private experience.
More than a picture
Imagery can include relevant sound, movement, timing and other sensations. A musician may rehearse the opening count. A player may imagine the sequence of a familiar setup. Relevant details matter more than adding every possible sense.
Vividness describes how clear an imagined experience seems. Controllability concerns directing or changing that representation. These are vocabulary for discussing imagery, not requirements for an automatic grade. A learner whose imagery is unclear can choose a different format and still demonstrate a coherent plan.
Choose a perspective for a purpose
An internal perspective represents the task from the performer's own viewpoint. An external perspective represents watching the performer from outside. Each may make different information easier to consider. The useful choice depends on what the rehearsal is meant to prepare.
For example, a first-person representation may help organize what the performer attends to. A storyboard showing positions may help discuss a sequence. Neither perspective is automatically correct for every task. Explain the reason for the chosen view rather than labelling the other view wrong.
Keep rehearsal and execution distinct
Rehearsing can help organize cues and responses. It does not prove that the skill has been physically demonstrated or that the result will occur. The lesson does not claim that imagined and actual actions are neurologically identical. It also does not count mental repetitions as measured changes in neural tissue.
Imagery can be discussed as representing movements or planning their sequence. For this introductory task, focus on the usable sequence and the evidence you can actually provide. A written plan shows planning; an observed performance supplies different evidence.
Select, sequence and review
Choose the format, identify the opening cue, outline the action and include a likely interruption. Use timing that is relevant to the purpose. Slowing a written walkthrough can help examine a difficult point; a later rehearsal may use the task's usual pace.
Review whether the representation makes the next action clearer. Change the format when it does not. You are assessed on the explanation, sequence and adaptation—not the vividness or emotion you claim to experience.
Worked example · fictional caseUse words when pictures are unclearTaylor finds detailed imagery unhelpful. Instead, Taylor writes four lines: confirm the starting cue; recall the count; begin the opening phrase; use the agreed recovery point if interrupted. Taylor then speaks the count during a hypothetical walkthrough.
The record shows the sequence and its purpose. It does not need to claim an internal movie or a neurological effect. A different format can be tried later if it serves another part of preparation.
FIGURE 3 · INCLUSIVE REHEARSAL FORMATS. Mental imagery, a written or spoken sequence, a storyboard or an appropriate eyes-open walkthrough can represent a task. First-person and observer perspectives serve different purposes. The assignment assesses the sequence, cues, recovery and explanation, not the vividness of an internal picture.Mental imagery, a written or spoken sequence, a storyboard or an appropriate eyes-open walkthrough can represent a task. First-person and observer perspectives serve different purposes. The assignment assesses the sequence, cues, recovery and explanation, not the vividness of an internal picture.Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.07.1 · A learner finds mental pictures unclear. Which option is suitable?Grade the learner lower for insufficient vividness.Require first-person imagery until it becomes perfect.Use a written, spoken or storyboard sequence with the same planning decisions.07.2 · How should imagery perspective be chosen?According to the task and the purpose of the rehearsal.Always from outside, regardless of the cue.Always from inside, because every other perspective is wrong.Choose a useful rehearsal formatChoose a rehearsal format and perspective. Explain how it helps prepare this particular task.Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.08 · Rehearse disruption and recoveryPractise a response to a likely interruption, not a perfect-performance fantasy.Learning goal: I can rehearse a disruption and adapt when the first response does not help.Before you begin: Use a fictional or appropriately supervised situation; no real stressful trial is required.Prepare for a change, not every possible disaster
A rehearsal that only ends in success may leave the performer unsure what to do after an interruption. The flat-tire drill uses an everyday metaphor: plan a response when the expected route changes. The purpose is coping preparation, not predicting that something bad must happen.
Choose a likely, manageable disruption. A starting cue may change, equipment may be unavailable or the speaking order may shift. The case should connect to the real task. Do not add unsafe conditions or humiliating pressure to make the exercise seem more demanding.
Identify the first useful signal
Describe how the performer would notice the change. “The accompaniment stops before my entry” is more specific than “everything goes wrong.” A clear signal helps select a practical response. It also prevents the plan from becoming a long list of fears.
Next identify what information is missing. Does the performer need a new starting cue, permission to restart or a different representation? Some problems require clarification or support. They cannot be solved by repeating a confidence statement more forcefully.
Rehearse the response and the return
Use a short sequence: notice the change; choose an appropriate response; return to a task cue; review at a sensible break. A response may include a brief familiar pause if useful. Its endpoint is the next action, not a requirement to feel perfect.
Taylor can rehearse the accompaniment change with words or a storyboard. The important decisions are what to ask, which cue to use and where to begin. Clear mental pictures are not necessary for explaining that sequence.
Include a second option
Ask what would happen if the first response did not help. If the new cue remains unclear, the performer may need another question or an agreed restart. If a mental image becomes confusing, a spoken count or written sequence may be more useful.
A second option should be relevant, not simply more intense. “Try harder” does not resolve an unavailable display. A printed graph might. The adjustment should match the obstacle identified in the case.
Use timing that serves the purpose
A slow walkthrough can help examine the sequence. A later rehearsal may use timing closer to the intended task. Neither is automatically correct for every stage. Explain why the chosen timing is useful and what remains to be tested in appropriate practice.
Keep imagined or hypothetical observations clearly labelled. Do not write that a rehearsal improved a real performance when no real trial occurred. A strong plan can honestly state, “This is the response I would try and the evidence I would look for afterward.”
Worked example · fictional caseThe accompaniment changesTaylor hears that the usual accompaniment is unavailable. First, Taylor confirms the alternative starting cue with the teacher. Taylor then uses the agreed count and begins at the specified point. If the cue is still unclear, Taylor asks for an agreed restart rather than guessing.
The response can be rehearsed as a spoken sequence. It preserves preparation while adapting to the change. It does not guarantee selection or claim that the interruption has no effect.
FIGURE 4 · DISRUPTION AND RECOVERY REHEARSAL. Begin with the task, introduce a plausible interruption, rehearse a suitable response and keep an alternative if it does not fit. The flat-tire metaphor concerns preparing an adjustment, not requiring distress or guaranteeing a result.Begin with the task, introduce a plausible interruption, rehearse a suitable response and keep an alternative if it does not fit. The flat-tire metaphor concerns preparing an adjustment, not requiring distress or guaranteeing a result.Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.08.1 · What is the purpose of the flat-tire drill in this phase?Prove that every difficulty can be controlled.Prepare a practical response to a likely disruption.Require a vivid image of failure before performance.08.2 · A mental rehearsal becomes confusing and does not clarify the sequence. What fits?Continue unchanged because one representation is compulsory.Claim that the real performance has already failed.Use a written or spoken sequence and check the cues again.Plan disruption and recoveryRehearse a likely interruption and your next response. Explain what would change if the first response did not help.Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.09 · Put the toolkit togetherConnect evidence, a routine, rehearsal and a review point.Learning goal: I can build a coherent toolkit and adapt it when the task changes.Before you begin: Use the same performer throughout; a toolkit is not a collection of unrelated tips.One task keeps the plan connected
A useful toolkit starts with the performer, task and conditions. Without that setting, a list of confidence tips can become disconnected. A routine for an audition may not fit a moving team play. A rehearsal for a familiar opening does not automatically prepare every possible question afterward.
Choose one case and bring the parts together. Identify evidence of preparation, a believable statement, a brief routine and a disruption response. Each part should support the same task. If a detail belongs to a different situation, explain the connection or leave it out of the core plan.
Evidence supports the statement
Begin with effort, success and progress from the case. Then state what those observations support. Taylor's improved count supports readiness for the entry. It does not guarantee the judging decision. A believable cue should reflect that boundary.
Useful feedback remains part of the toolkit. Keeping a record of success does not require blocking information about an error. A correction can identify the next practice target while a global personal judgment is set aside or addressed through support.
The routine ends with action
The C-B-A sequence connects a grounded cue, an optional familiar comfortable pause and task-appropriate attention. Explain when it is used and what happens next. The final cue should be specific enough for the performer to follow.
A routine is not the whole preparation. Skills, materials, instruction and support remain relevant. If a rule or starting cue is unclear, the plan should include clarification. Do not use confidence language to cover a practical gap.
Rehearsal prepares a usable response
Choose an imagery, written, spoken, storyboard or walkthrough format that suits the purpose. Include a plausible interruption and a return point. State the timing and perspective only when they help explain the sequence.
The representation does not need to feel vivid or emotionally powerful to show sound reasoning. It also does not establish that the real skill has been demonstrated. Keep planning evidence, hypothetical practice and actual observed performance distinct.
Review what can be checked
A useful review separates the planned action from the result. Did the performer use the agreed cue? Was the new starting instruction understood? What would make the plan clearer? A score or selection outcome may matter, but it does not explain every cause by itself.
Use one changed condition to test whether the plan can adapt. The usual display may disappear, the preparation pause may shorten or the task may involve a partner. Keep the principle that still applies and revise the part affected by the change.
The final product is a plan someone can explain and use—not a declaration of perfect confidence. A thoughtful limitation or a clear request for support can strengthen the plan rather than weaken it.
Worked example · fictional caseA toolkit that stays realisticTaylor uses the E-S-P record to support the statement, “I have practised the entry.” The routine ends with the agreed count and starting cue. The rehearsal uses a written sequence because imagery is unclear. The disruption plan includes asking about alternative accompaniment and confirming a restart point.
The plan is connected, but selection remains uncertain. A later review would examine the cue, sequence and response separately from the decision. That limit keeps the explanation believable.
FIGURE 5 · CONFIDENCE AND REHEARSAL AS AN ADAPTABLE PLAN. Preparation evidence supports a believable routine. Rehearsal represents the task and a recovery response. Review uses observations and useful feedback to adapt the next plan. None of these guarantees a result or requires certainty.Preparation evidence supports a believable routine. Rehearsal represents the task and a recovery response. Review uses observations and useful feedback to adapt the next plan. None of these guarantees a result or requires certainty.Try the concept checksChoose before checking. Explanations are in Answers and feedback.09.1 · Which connection makes a toolkit coherent?The evidence, routine and recovery response serve the same task.Every popular technique is included regardless of purpose.The performer claims total certainty at the end.09.2 · The task changes from a solo explanation to a partner presentation. What should the review consider?Only whether the learner feels more confident.New shared cues, timing and a response if the partner’s cue is missed.Whether to discard all earlier preparation automatically.Connect and review the toolkitConnect preparation evidence, a routine and a recovery response into one usable plan. Identify one limitation.Write two to four sentences using case evidence, a choice and a reason. Save this response for Build.10 · Decision practiceComplete all three cases with reasons, then the transfer below. These are the same decisions in the guided and untimed website pathways. The timed game is optional.Case 1 · Ready for one partTaylor has practised the entry accurately in several rehearsals, but does not know how the judging decision will be made. Taylor says, “I must be certain I will be selected before I begin.”Use the entry evidence, clarify the starting arrangement and accept uncertainty about selection.Treat rehearsal success as proof of selection.Ignore all preparation because the decision is uncertain.Explain: What evidence supports your response? What would you check next?Case 2 · A useful correctionA performer hears, “Your setup was rushed; pause at the agreed mark. You always ruin things.” The first observation matches the practice record.Reject the whole statement, including the useful correction.Keep the task-based correction, reject the global judgment and seek respectful support if needed.Accept the global judgment as a measured description of identity.Explain: What evidence supports your response? What would you check next?Case 3 · No clear mental pictureA student cannot form a clear image of the presentation opening. A printed outline is available, and the student can explain the sequence aloud.Require vivid first-person imagery before continuing.Assume rehearsal is impossible for this student.Use a spoken or written walkthrough, including a likely interruption and return cue.Explain: What evidence supports your response? What would you check next?Transfer the ideaChoose a different sport, artistic or academic task. Identify preparation evidence, a suitable rehearsal format and a response to one new interruption. State what your plan cannot guarantee.11 · My Confidence and Rehearsal ToolkitUse the same case throughout. Each field asks for a short structured response, not an essay. Earlier lesson answers can be reused and adapted. The website protects edited Build responses with a replacement confirmation.The five steps contain twelve required evidence fields. Your teacher evaluates the reasoning and plan, not a self-reported feeling, game score or word count.Step 1 · Start with evidenceUse Taylor or a complete fictional case. Readiness and uncertainty can exist together.Task, preparation and uncertaintyDescribe the task, two preparation facts and one uncertainty.Effort, success and progressDevelop one specific example in each category from the case. Explain the distinction.Worked field examples are collected in Answers and feedback. Use them to check the reasoning rather than copy without adapting.Step 2 · Interpret feedbackGround the confidence statement in evidence while keeping useful corrections.Two sources and their limitsChoose two sources of confidence. Explain what each supports and cannot prove.Error, feedback and global judgmentSeparate an observed error, useful correction and whole-person judgment. State the action to keep.A believable statementWrite a short evidence-based statement that leads to action without a guarantee.Worked field examples are collected in Answers and feedback. Use them to check the reasoning rather than copy without adapting.Step 3 · Prepare and rehearseChoose a routine and representation that fit the case. Physical practice and vivid imagery are not required.C-B-A in contextExplain C, an optional comfortable B during a suitable pause, and task-appropriate A.Representation and perspectiveChoose imagery, writing, speaking, storyboard or walkthrough. Explain why it serves the task.Sequence, cues and timingWrite the rehearsal sequence and explain its timing. A slowed walkthrough is acceptable when purposeful.Worked field examples are collected in Answers and feedback. Use them to check the reasoning rather than copy without adapting.Step 4 · Rehearse a disruptionInclude a response and a return point, not only the imagined problem.A likely interruptionDescribe a plausible interruption and how it would be noticed.Adjustment and restartExplain the first response, return cue and second option. Change representation if useful.Worked field examples are collected in Answers and feedback. Use them to check the reasoning rather than copy without adapting.Step 5 · Review and adaptDistinguish planned, hypothetical and actually observed evidence. Do not invent a real trial.Observation, adjustment and limitationState an observation to check, a possible adjustment and a limitation of the plan.A changed taskNew case: a familiar solo presentation becomes a partner presentation without slides. Explain what you would keep and change.Worked field examples are collected in Answers and feedback. Use them to check the reasoning rather than copy without adapting.Build review criteriaThe levels describe evidence, not an automatic numeric grade.Concept accuracyNot yet shown: Key ideas are missing or incorrect.Developing: Some relevant ideas appear, but distinctions need clarification.Clear: Terms and distinctions are accurate in the stated case.Thoughtful: Accurate distinctions are carried into a changed situation, with relevant limits.Evidence and task fitNot yet shown: The response does not use the case.Developing: Some evidence is named, but the choice is weakly connected.Clear: The selected response is supported by relevant case evidence.Thoughtful: The response weighs relevant evidence and explains why an alternative fits less well.Usable planNot yet shown: The plan is missing or cannot be followed.Developing: Actions are present but vague or incomplete.Clear: The sequence, cues and support are specific and workable.Thoughtful: The plan remains concise while providing a sensible alternative when conditions change.Reasoning and adaptationNot yet shown: Reasons and adjustments are not shown.Developing: A reason or change is suggested without enough explanation.Clear: Choices and adjustments are explained using the task.Thoughtful: The response explains tradeoffs, limitations and what evidence would prompt another change.12 · Written reviewWrite a first explanation before checking the answer section. Then explain a revision, or explain why the answer fits and add a useful example or limit. The website keeps the first-answer snapshot.Review 1Explain how confidence for a task differs from certainty about its outcome.First explanation: two to four sentences.After comparison: what did you clarify, correct or strengthen?Review 2A teacher identifies an error and gives a specific correction. How can the learner protect personal worth while using the information?First explanation: two to four sentences.After comparison: what did you clarify, correct or strengthen?Review 3Correct this claim: “A rehearsal must be a vivid first-person movie, and each imagined repetition is identical to a physical one.”First explanation: two to four sentences.After comparison: what did you clarify, correct or strengthen?Review 4Revisit one earlier response. Explain one revision that makes the toolkit more believable or usable.First explanation: two to four sentences.After comparison: what did you clarify, correct or strengthen?Final checkpointAnswer all questions before checking the explanations. The website saves attempts and uses a 70% local practice threshold. This is not a teacher grade or an LMS submission.1 · Which statement expresses useful task confidence without certainty?The result has already been decided in my favour.My preparation supports the opening, and I can use my practised cue.Confidence means never noticing a gap in preparation.I must report complete belief before beginning.2 · Which example most clearly describes self-efficacy?A judgment of overall personal worth.A prediction that no opponent can win.Belief in being able to carry out this practised serving routine.A requirement to feel the same in every setting.3 · Which record supplies the most useful effort, success and progress evidence?Ten broad compliments with no task details.A statement that every rehearsal was perfect.A game balance interpreted as real confidence.A specific practice action, an achieved skill and an observed improvement over time.4 · How should specific corrective feedback be handled?Keep relevant information while separating it from any global personal judgment.Reject all criticism to avoid confidence withdrawals.Accept every harsh claim as a fact about identity.Deny the error before attempting an adjustment.5 · A performer misses an entry. Which interpretation avoids a global judgment without denying the error?Nothing needs changing because confidence must remain perfect.The entry was late; I will check the count and practise the correction.The miss proves I cannot perform anything.The next result is guaranteed because I noticed the error.6 · What is the main purpose of rehearsing a likely disruption?Guarantee that no interruption will occur.Create the strongest possible negative feeling.Prepare a response and a useful return point.Prove that mental rehearsal replaces skill practice.7 · In C-B-A, how should the final attention cue be chosen?Always attend internally, regardless of the action.Always look at the smallest external object.Use the cue with the most impressive wording.Select the information needed for the particular next task.8 · A performer interprets a difficult task as manageable because of preparation. What can reasonably be claimed?The interpretation may support a useful next action but does not guarantee the outcome.The result is fixed by the interpretation.No practical support can still be needed.All uncertainty has been removed.9 · What makes rehearsal purposeful?Using as many sensations as possible regardless of relevance.Preparing relevant cues, sequence and a response to a likely change.Reporting a vivid image even when none occurs.Repeating a script without checking the task.10 · How should imagery perspective be selected?First-person is compulsory in every situation.External viewing is always the only useful choice.Choose and justify a perspective for the rehearsal’s purpose.Perspective determines the result before action.11 · Imagery is unclear and frustrating for a learner. Which response fits this phase?Reduce the grade for poor internal pictures.Demand more intense imagery before allowing progress.Conclude that the learner cannot prepare mentally.Use a written, spoken, storyboard or walkthrough alternative with the same decisions.12 · Which statement about rehearsal timing is most appropriate?Choose timing for the purpose: slow a walkthrough to examine it, then use relevant task timing where useful.Every rehearsal must be slower than action.Every rehearsal must be faster to build confidence.Matching timing proves an imagined repetition is neurologically identical to action.Glossary and sourcesTask confidenceA grounded belief that preparation and skills can support a particular task.Self-efficacyBelief in the ability to carry out a particular action or meet a demand.CertaintyTreating a result or claim as settled or guaranteed.Mastery experienceEvidence from doing a task or developing a skill.ModellingLearning information by observing another person’s example.FeedbackInformation about an action and a possible adjustment.EffortUseful work applied to the task.SuccessAn achieved action or standard in a particular attempt.ProgressA supported comparison showing change over time.Confidence accountA metaphor for retaining relevant preparation evidence, not a literal measured balance.Global judgmentA broad claim about a whole person’s worth or permanent ability.ReframingConsidering a different, believable interpretation without denying the facts.C-B-ACue your conviction, Breathe your body, Attach your attention; a qualified preparation sequence.RehearsalRepresenting and preparing a task sequence before using it.ImageryRepresenting aspects of a task in imagination.VividnessHow clear an imagined experience seems.ControllabilityThe ability to direct or change a representation.Internal perspectiveRepresenting the task from the performer’s viewpoint.External perspectiveRepresenting the performer from an outside viewpoint.StoryboardA sequence of images or labelled frames representing a task.Flat-tire drillA metaphor for rehearsing a likely disruption and recovery.Coping rehearsalPreparing a practical response and return point when conditions change.SourcesSports Wellness supplied The Toolkit teaching chapter and task materials. New fictional cases, corrected learner explanations and practice items are authored for this course.Confidence-account, E-S-P, C-B-A and coping-rehearsal structures adapted from the supplied Toolkit material, which attributes confidence practices to Nate Zinsser. These structures are taught as planning tools and metaphors, not guarantees or neurological measurements.Answers and feedbackUse this section after trying the questions. Compare the ideas and evidence rather than matching every word. Written responses are not automatically marked.02 · Confidence for a particular taskCheck 02.1: C. The statement concerns an ability to carry out a particular action. It does not guarantee the outside decision.Check 02.2: A. Prepared skills and remaining uncertainty can exist together. Clarifying the arrangement addresses the gap while retaining useful preparation.Written application: look forState the specific task.Connect two pieces of preparation evidence to it.Identify one uncertainty without turning it into a global judgment.03 · Find evidence of preparationCheck 03.1: B. The demonstration supplies information. The learner still needs an opportunity to understand, try and review the sequence.Check 03.2: C. Specific feedback links an observation to an action. It can support preparation without making a claim about the whole person.Written application: look forName two different sources.Link each to a particular part of the task.Explain the limit of each source and a useful next question.04 · Keep useful evidenceCheck 04.1: A. Progress requires a comparison across time. Attendance describes an action; a broad affirmation does not identify a change.Check 04.2: B. The account is a metaphor. A programmed balance does not measure confidence, identity or emotional control.Written application: look forSeparate effort, success and change over time.Use specific case evidence.State what the record supports without promising a result.05 · Use feedback after setbacksCheck 05.1: C. The statement identifies a task feature and a possible adjustment. It does not judge the whole person.Check 05.2: A. Protecting personal worth should not remove useful corrections. Evaluate the information and seek support for harmful comments.Written application: look forIdentify the observation, correction and global judgment.Retain relevant feedback without denying the error.Name a useful action or support request.06 · A routine you can useCheck 06.1: A. The statement connects preparation to a practical action without promising the result.Check 06.2: B. A routine cannot supply information that has not been given. Clarification addresses the actual need.Written application: look forMake C believable and evidence-based.Describe B as optional, comfortable and appropriate to a safe pause.Explain the task information selected in A and the next action.07 · Rehearse in a way that works for youCheck 07.1: C. The task assesses preparation and reasoning. Another representation can demonstrate those decisions without requiring a private imagery experience.Check 07.2: A. Different perspectives can highlight different information. The learner should justify the choice for the stated purpose.Written application: look forName the format and purpose.Explain the relevant cues, perspective or sequence.State what the rehearsal can and cannot demonstrate.08 · Rehearse disruption and recoveryCheck 08.1: B. It is a coping-rehearsal metaphor. The useful outcome is a response and return point, not certainty or a required emotional experience.Check 08.2: C. Changing the representation can preserve the preparation purpose. The learner can explain the sequence without forcing an unhelpful image.Written application: look forName a plausible interruption and its signal.Give the response, return cue and relevant timing.Add a second option and label the rehearsal as hypothetical when appropriate.09 · Put the toolkit togetherCheck 09.1: A. The parts should support the same demand. A long list of techniques or a claim about feelings does not establish that connection.Check 09.2: B. The changed task adds coordination demands. Preserve useful preparation while adapting the cues and recovery plan to those demands.Written application: look forUse one consistent task.Link evidence, routine and rehearsal decisions.Name an observation for review and one limitation.Decision casesCase 1: A. Evidence can support a particular action without settling the outcome. Clarification addresses what can be learned; uncertainty does not erase preparation.Case 2: B. An accurate observation and correction can help. The personal attack does not supply additional task guidance. Keeping useful feedback is different from accepting harmful judgments.Case 3: C. The intended evidence is a coherent preparation and recovery plan. Another representation can show those decisions without requiring vivid imagery.Transfer: identify a genuinely different situation, use its evidence to choose a response and explain a relevant limit or adjustment.Build field examplesTask, preparation and uncertaintyTaylor has practised the entry and improved the count, but the selection decision and new room remain uncertain.Effort, success and progressEffort: worked on the count. Success: completed the opening accurately. Progress: entries became more consistent across rehearsals.Two sources and their limitsThe teacher’s model clarifies timing; Taylor’s practice provides direct evidence for the entry. Neither proves selection.Error, feedback and global judgmentA late entry is an observation; using the count is a correction; “not a performer” is a global judgment. Keep the count correction.A believable statementI have practised the entry. I will use the agreed count and attend to the starting cue.C-B-A in contextC: use the prepared count. B: a familiar comfortable pause if useful. A: listen for the agreed entry cue and begin.Representation and perspectiveA spoken count with a written sequence makes Taylor’s entry clearer than detailed imagery.Sequence, cues and timingWalk through the changed start slowly to check the cue, then rehearse the count at the relevant musical timing.A likely interruptionThe usual accompaniment is unavailable before Taylor’s turn. The starting cue may therefore change.Adjustment and restartConfirm the alternative cue, use the agreed count and begin. If the cue is still unclear, ask for an agreed restart.Observation, adjustment and limitationCheck whether Taylor identifies the new cue and starts at the agreed point. Clarify the cue if needed. Selection still cannot be guaranteed.A changed taskKeep preparation evidence and a believable cue. Use a printed outline, agree partner cues and rehearse a missed handover.Written reviewReview 1: Task confidence can be grounded in evidence of preparation and an action the performer can carry out. Certainty claims the outcome is settled. A prepared performer can act while still uncertain about judging, opponents or conditions.Review 2: Keep the accurate observation and task-based correction. Do not turn one error into a whole-person judgment or deny the error to protect confidence. Clarify advice when needed and seek support for disrespectful treatment.Review 3: Choose the representation and perspective for a purpose. A written, spoken, storyboard or walkthrough format can demonstrate planning. Rehearsal and actual performance provide different evidence; this course does not claim neurological equivalence or measured tissue change per repetition.Review 4: A useful revision may replace a guarantee with preparation evidence, preserve a specific correction, shorten a routine or change a rehearsal format. Explain the task-based reason and identify what remains uncertain.Checkpoint explanations1: B. The statement joins evidence to action without promising an outside result.2: C. Self-efficacy is task-specific. It does not establish personal worth or guarantee the final result.3: D. The three categories describe useful work, achievement and change. They should be connected to the task.4: A. Confidence grounded in preparation can include corrections. The learner need not accept personal attacks or deny the observed error.5: B. The statement retains the observation and proposes a task-based action without overgeneralizing.6: C. Coping rehearsal prepares an action when conditions change. It does not prevent every interruption or replace actual skill learning.7: D. The task determines useful attention. Width, direction and timing can change with the demand.8: A. A believable appraisal connects to resources and actions. It is not a guarantee or a substitute for missing information.9: B. Purpose comes from the task information and usable response. Vividness alone is not the assessment target.10: C. Different representations can serve different purposes. The learner should explain the choice rather than assume one universal rule.11: D. An accessible representation can show the preparation and recovery sequence without grading a private imagery experience.12: A. Timing serves a learning purpose. It does not provide a neurological guarantee or a universal pace rule.
