Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
Module 6 Assignment: Anthropology and Forensic Entomology
/44
Lesson A: Determining Ancestry and Sex from SkeletalRemains
1. Identify four pieces of information that a forensicanthropologist would include in the
osteobiography of a subject. (4 marks)
2. Describe three ways that human skeletal remainscan be differentiated from animal skeletal
remains. (3 marks)
3.Describe two ways that the sex of skeletal remainscan be determined when no skull has been
found. (2 marks)
Lesson B: Determining Traumatic Injuries from SkeletalRemains
4. Why is the cause of death usually inferred by forensicanthropologists rather than confirmed
after they have studied the skeletal remains? (3 marks)
5.Complete the chart below by stating one type ofweapon that could have caused each type of
trauma, one type of force that produces each typeof trauma, and the type or types of bone
injury resulting from each type of trauma. (12 marks)
Type of TraumaType of WeaponType of ForceType(s) of Bone Injury
Blunt Force
Projectile
1

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
Sharp Force
Strangulation
Lesson C.  The Use of Forensic Entomology in CriminalInvestigations
6. How can insects be used to determine if an individualhas suffered from poisoning? (2 marks)
Use the following information to answer the next question.
The skeletal remains of an adult male were found undersome tree branches and snow on
the outskirts of Edmonton in January. A forensic entomologistobserved more blowfly
pupal membranes below the ribs in the chest regionthan in the skull of the victim.
7. a.  Use your knowledge of insect maturation ordevelopment to explain that the victim
described above was deposited in the above locationbefore or after winter began. (2 marks).
b. What does the observation of numerous pupal membranesin the chest region suggest about
the cause of death of the victim described above?(2 marks)
8. a. What type of database did the Canadian PoliceResearch Centre begin in 1996? (1 mark)
b. Why is such a database necessary in Canada? (2marks)
2

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
Lesson D.  Crime Case Studies Involving Forensic Anthropologyand Forensic
Entomology
Case Study #1: Bones that were Worth a Thousand Words
10. a. Identify two pieces of skull evidence thatwould have distinguished Czar Nicholas’ wife,
Czaritsa Aleksandra, from the adult male skeletons?(2 marks)
b. Outline two pieces of evidence other than boneevidence used to identify the remains of
Czaritsa Aleksandra. (2 marks)
Case Study #2: The Girl, the Army Sergeant, and theBugs
11. a. Explain why no beetles were found on the victim’sskeletal remains. (2 marks)
b. Why did forensic entomologists in this case obtaindata from a weather station near the crime
scene? (2 marks)
Case Study #3: The Farmhouse Murder
12. List three pieces of evidence that suggest thevictim had been dead for longer than 20 days.
(3 marks)
3
