Defining Forensic Toxicology
In Canada in 2005, criminal charges related to marijuana possession were down 12% from the previous year, criminal charges involving cocaine possession increased by 11%, and criminal charges related to the possession of other drugs (such as ecstasy and methamphetamines) increased by 39%.
Toxicology is the study of the origin, nature, and properties of various drugs, poisons, and toxins. Toxicological specialists work in hospitals where the identification of an overdose can mean life or death.
The terms drugs, poisons, and toxins have subtle and often overlapping definitions.
Drugs are usually substances ingested intentionally to produce a change that results in better health, pain relief, or pleasure.
Poisons are usually substances ingested unintentionally that cause poorer health. Most drugs can be taken at high doses to become poisons. One common method of attempting suicide is to take too many drugs or to ingest poison intentionally.
Toxins are harmful environmental chemicals that cause negative health effects, usually after prolonged exposure. However, exposure to toxins at high concentrations can quickly cause harmful effects or even death. Intentionally exposing someone else to a toxin is a crime.
Forensic toxicology is the application of toxicology in the pursuit of solving criminal cases. It generally is concerned with the detection and identification of drugs, poisons, or toxins that cause adverse physiological effects. Law enforcement agencies and medical examiner's offices require the services of forensic toxicologists. The main responsibility of a forensic toxicologist is to detect and identify the presence of drugs, poisons, or toxins in body fluids, tissues, and organs.
The work of a forensic toxicologist is generally in three main categories:
Testing for alcohol in blood and/or urine samples
Detection of drugs, poisons, and toxins in body fluids, tissues, or organs
Identification and measurement of the specific type of drug, poison, or toxin found within a subject
