In 1980, Roy Hazelwood and John Douglas made a distinction between organized and disorganized criminal behaviour. Both Hazelwood and Douglas were criminal profilers working in the FBI’s Behavioral Science unit.
Organized Offenders: As the name implies, organized offenders plan and execute their crimes in organized ways because they are scheming, deliberate, and methodical individuals. The organized offender is a self-absorbed psychopath lacking empathy and remorse. Most organized offenders are well spoken, outgoing, and pleasant. Because of this, they appear non-threatening at first. Organized offenders target their victims, choosing primarily strangers whom they often capture by conning them, perhaps by offering money or asking for assistance. Offenders usually bring their own weapons and take them from the crime scenes. Organized offenders are careful; they often take time to clean up or remove evidence such as fingerprints, blood, bullet cartridges, or knives from the crime scenes. Often this type of offender will move or conceal the body.
Disorganized Offenders: In contrast, disorganized offenders are loners with poor social skills. They often feel inadequate and have difficulties maintaining friendships and loving relationships. Disorganized offenders tend to appear unkempt and often will live in messy homes. Their crimes are usually committed impulsively sparked by a mental disorder, drugs, alcohol, youth, or inexperience. The disorganized offender tends to attack people they know, such as family, friends, neighbours, or acquaintances. Their victims are incapacitated quickly without much warning and usually left badly mutilated. They often kill their victims with items at the crime scene and make no effort to hide the weapons or the bodies afterwards. This type of offender leaves a chaotic mess.
“The organized offender is a crafty wolf, while the disorganized offender is more like a wild dog.”
- Stephen G Michaud and Roy Hazelwood, The Evil That Men Do, (1998)
The following two lists outline some of the potential behavioural and personality traits often exhibited by organized and disorganized offenders.
Organized Offender
Disorganized Offender
Older mature individual
Young immature individual
Average to above average intelligence
Below average intelligence
College educated
High school dropout
Socially competent
Socially inadequate
Good hygiene
Poor hygiene
Sexually competent
Sexually incompetent
Father stable
Father unstable
Living with partner
Often lives alone
Crime scene some distance from home
Lives or works near crime scene
Mobility with car in good condition
Often walks or takes public transportation
Follows news media
Minimal interest in news
Contacts police to play games with them
Contacts families of victims
May change jobs or leave town
Doesn’t always have a steady job
Responds well to direct interview
Does not respond well in interviews
Functions mainly during the day
Functions mainly at night
Controlled mood during crime
Anxious mood during crime
May use alcohol during crime
Often uses alcohol or drugs
Dismembers body
Leaves body intact
Leaves little physical evidence at scene
Leaves physical evidence at scene
Kills at one site, disposes body elsewhere
Kills and leaves body at one site
Leaves a organized crime scene
Leaves a chaotic crime scene
Resistant to counselling
Responds to counselling
Some criminals (on the advice of their defence lawyers) plead not guilty by reason of insanity to excuse themselves from lengthy criminal trials. This type of defence applies to a wide range of mental disorders, one of the most popular being psychosis caused by schizophrenia. Those who argue this type of defence successfully are usually sentenced to clinical treatment rather than prison. They may be released when they are certified as safe to society.
