Determining the Cause of Death using Forensic Entomology
To find and convict a killer, it is often important to determine both when and how a victim died. The sites of blowfly or flesh fly infestation on a corpse may help to determine the cause of death or at least help in the reconstruction of events prior to death. Insect remains on a body can also be tested for foreign substances (such as drugs or toxins).
Usually, flies lay their eggs in the openings of the corpse, such as nose, eyes, ears, mouth, anus, and penis or vagina. Interestingly, forensic entomologists have found that flies tend to lay their eggs more often in the openings of the facial region than in the openings of the anogenital region (that is anus and penis or vagina). However, if a victim has been sexually assaulted prior to death and suffered from bleeding in the anogenital region during the attack, flies will likely infest these areas more than other body openings. Therefore, evidence of heavy fly colonization in the anogenital region of a body is evidence that a sex crime may have occurred.
Flies tend to lay their eggs in enclosed, moist locations such as body openings or open wounds. When heavy infestation of eggs and/or maggots are found in an area of the body where there is no apparent body opening (such as arms or legs), investigators may assume that trauma (such as a knife or bullet wound) has occurred at this site.
Not all homicide victims die from traumatic injuries. Some die of drug overdose or poisoning. Drugs and poisons can be traced in the blood, urine, stomach contents, hair, and nails of a victim’s body. The hair and nails of the dead do not decompose as quickly as the blood, urine, and stomach contents; therefore, they are reliable sites for testing for these deadly substances. These drugs and poisons can also be detected in the maggots and pupae that are found on human remains. Testing maggots and pupae for drugs and poisons is especially useful if the hair and nails of a victim are not found with the remains because various body parts are deposited in different locations or because certain body parts are consumed by an animal.
The Importance of Blowflies
Police investigators got a tip that the body of a murder victim had been dumped down an open well on a small farm in rural Indiana, USA. The exact location of the farm and the well was unknown, but when investigators were searching one of several farmyards, it was obvious they had found the right location. Investigators noticed several thousand blowflies hovering over a heap of old tires. When they began removing the tires, they found a well that had been filled with tires, junk, and rocks. At the bottom of the well, they found the murder victim. Despite the fact the flies could not reach the body because of all the debris, the odour of the decomposing body had attracted them to the site.
