The Bolt Action Rifle
Bolt-action rifles are reliable and easy to maintain. These rifles vary widely in calibre and purpose. They are characterized by a handle (bolt) on the side that allows the user to extract a spent cartridge and place a new one into the barrel from the magazine by sliding the bolt back and then forward.
Bolt-action rifles typically hold up to five cartridges and must be reloaded after each round is fired. Telescopic sights help bring targets into focus over long distances. Depending on its calibre, the use of a telescope mounted along the barrel above the action of the rifle increases the effective range of a bolt-action rifle to between 200 metres and 1000 metres (1 kilometre).
Because of the longer shell casings, bolt-action rifle bullets possess extremely high muzzle velocities and kinetic energies. For example, while a standard .40 calibre pistol round commonly used by police agencies has a muzzle velocity of 305 metres/second and 542 Joules of kinetic energy, a .308 round from a police sniper’s bolt-action rifle has a muzzle velocity of over 792 m/s and almost 3660 J of kinetic energy! In other words, a rifle bullet is smaller in diameter, travels faster, and has much more kinetic energy than a bullet fired by either a revolver or a pistol.
Just as muzzle velocity, kinetic energy, and trajectory vary with revolver and pistol ammunition, they also vary widely depending on the calibre of the rifle bullet. However, the trajectory of rifle bullets can in some cases be much flatter than that of handgun ammunition. For example, a handgun round fired parallel to the ground might fall into the dirt after it has travelled the length of two football fields. A rifle bullet used in big game rifles might travel over 3 kilometres before doing so.
Bolt-action rifles have existed since the late 1800s, serving as the principal type of weaponry for soldiers until World War II in 1939. They remain popular with big-game hunters, farmers, and shooting enthusiasts.
The Automatic Rifle
Typically referred to as assault rifles, an automatic rifle is characterized by its ability to fire a continuous stream of bullets with each pull of the trigger. The rifle pictured above is a version of the standard weapon used by the US military and increasingly by police agencies across North America.
Assault rifles are highly accurate up to approximately 200 metres. They are designed for combat scenarios in which a large number of bullets are directed at a target in a brief time. Automatic weapons such as the AR-15 have been modified for law enforcement use and are valued for their accuracy and stopping power.
Automatic weapons, whether machine guns, assault rifles, or submachine guns, are available for various sizes of ammunition, including .223, 9 mm, and 7.62 mm. Most of these ammunition rounds have relatively flat trajectories. This means that a bullet can travel a great distance without falling into the ground. For example, the .223 round commonly used in the AR-15 rifle might drop only 1 to 2 cm as it travels the length of two football fields. Consequently, automatic weapons are highly accurate under controlled conditions.
Rifle Cartridges
With high rates of fire and tremendous muzzle velocities, automatic rifles can be extremely dangerous in the wrong hands. These weapons are illegal in Canada without successfully completing a rigorous screening process.
