Criminal profilers will state only the behavioural and personality characteristics that can be justified from the information they have gathered from the case in question. In other words, criminal profilers outline only the behavioural and personality characteristics they can explain using research data and valid trends and patterns about convicted criminals.
Serial murderers are difficult to apprehend because they plan their murders, often travel long distances between their crimes, and frequently wait months between killings.
Some of the behavioural and personality characteristics often found in a criminal profile include the following:
Age: usually given as a range of possible ages for the suspect (For example, most serial killers are between the ages of 20 and 35 years while 75% of all sexual assaults are committed by culprits that are less than 25 year.)
Gender: often determined by the gender of the victims and the nature of the crime scene (For example, 75% of all sex assaults are committed by white males.)
Ancestry: usually the same as the first victim
Residency: determined by using geographical profiling
Intelligence Level: higher level of intelligence, especially in carefully planned crimes
Occupation: consistently employed in certain types of positions (For example, most serial arsonists are employed in subservient positions.) or recently become unemployed (For example, many mass murderers have experienced recent job loss.)
Marital Status: varies among single, married, separated, divorced, or widowed (For example, most sex offenders and pedophiles are single.)
Motivating Factors: whether the crime was random or planned in detail (For example, little physical evidence at a crime scene that appears unaltered often indicates the crime was premeditated. The nature of a victim’s injuries may indicate whether the suspect had personal anger towards the victim.)
Arrest Record: often committed by a suspect with an arrest record or by someone who has committed crimes but has not been caught
Provocation Factors: ways to cause perpetrators to come forward (For example, criminal profilers often suggest methods to draw out the suspect.)
"In a situation where you find a distant mother, an absent or abusive father and siblings, a non-intervening school system, an ineffective social services system, and an inability of the person to relate sexually in a normal way to others, you have almost a formula for producing a deviant [not necessarily murderous] personality."
Robert K. Ressler, Whoever Fights Monsters, (p. 93)
