Criminal profiling helps law enforcement officers in their pursuit of unknown suspects. This investigative tool is also known as
offender profiling
psychological profiling
criminal personality profiling
behavioural profiling
criminal investigative analysis
In criminal profiling, a criminal suspect is analyzed based on the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was committed. Various aspects of the criminal's personality may be determined from his or her choices before, during, and after the crime. In addition, a comparison with the characteristics of known personality types, mental abnormalities, and criminal profiles further helps to identify traits the culprit may possess. This information in combination with the physical evidence helps to develop a practical working profile of the offender.
Geographic profiling is a sub-type of criminal profiling. This criminal investigative technique analyzes the locations of a connected series of crimes to determine the most probable area where the suspect may be found. Geographic profiling is used in serious criminal cases of serial homicide, rape, serial arson, bombing, and serial robbery.
Module Learner Objectives:
By the end of Module 5, you should be able to…
appreciate the value of criminal profiling in criminal investigations
outline the types of crimes for which a criminal profile is necessary
understand the five main steps involved in generating a criminal profile
compare the traits of an organized offender with those of an disorganized offender
identify a given criminal suspect(s) as an organized, disorganized, or combination offender
outline the contents of a criminal profile report and explain the characteristics included in the report
analyze or create a criminal profile of a criminal suspect using mock crime scene data
explain the use and purpose of a subset of criminal profiling: geographic profiling
analyze or create a geographic profile of a criminal suspect using mock crime scene data
discuss a historical crime case(s) that involved the use of criminal profiling and/or geographic profiling (such as Washington Sniper shootings, Oklahoma federal building bombing, Unabomber, Anthrax letters, Mad Bomber, or Son of Sam).
“Crime is terribly revealing. Try and vary your methods as you will, your tastes, your habits, your attitude of mind, and your soul is revealed by your actions.”
- Agatha Christie (English detective, novelist, and playwright, 1890-1976)
