Anthropology is the study of the biological and cultural aspects of humankind in any place at any time. Two sub-fields of anthropology are cultural anthropology – the observation over time of norms, customs, political, economic, and religious systems in a culture
physical or biological anthropology – the identification and interpretation of human evolution and variation in humans
Forensic anthropology is a specialized field of forensic science in which the goal is to analyze and interpret the human remains of unexplained deaths. Forensic anthropologists conduct their work by analyzing human skeletons or decomposing remains to extract as much information about the person and the circumstances surrounding his or her death. Forensic anthropologists provide this valuable information to a medical examiner, pathologist, or law enforcement officer. A forensic anthropologist analyzes remains according to the following list of questions:
Are the remains skeletal?
Are the skeletal remains human or animal?
Are the skeletal remains modern or historical?
How many individuals are present?
Is there evidence of time since the death?
What is the age, sex, stature, and ancestry of each individual?
What are the individualizing features of the remains?
Is there evidence that can aid in establishing the cause and manner of death?
The forensic anthropologist creates an osteobiography (bone story) about the deceased remains they examine. This osteobiography includes a description of age, sex, stature, ancestry, and individualizing features such as previous illnesses, genetic abnormalities, and trauma. Determining the age, sex, stature, and ancestry helps to determine if the individual is a missing person. Identification of individualizing features may help to identify a person positively. Forensic anthropologists also look for signs of recent trauma that may have been the cause of death.
"Forensic anthropology is specialized and noble. It is science in the service of humanity."
- Source: Dr. Stanley Rhine, Ph.D. Foreword in Introduction to Forensic Anthropology: A Textbook. Allyn & Bacon (2002).
