How Drugs Affect the Human Body
Most illegal drugs are psychoactive drugs; that is, they alter a person’s perception or mood. Some psychoactive drugs are known as depressants because they reduce an individual’s sense of alertness by causing relaxation (e.g., marijuana). Other psychoactive drugs are known as stimulants because they intensify an individual’s sense of alertness to cause hyperactivity (e.g., cocaine).
Psychoactive drugs can be taken orally or through injection, but they may be absorbed through body membranes such as those located in the nose, lungs, rectum, or vagina. To influence the human body, any type of drug must be absorbed into the blood stream and be transported to the body region where it has an affect. Initially, a drug can be detected both in the region it targets and throughout the bloodstream.
Drugs that are taken orally go through a slightly different process. Any drug absorbed through the digestive tract into the bloodstream must first pass through the liver before it travels to the body region that it affects. As the drug passes through the liver, some of the drug is broken down into metabolites. The amount of drug that gets metabolized depends upon a number of factors including the polarity and stability of the drug, the rate of absorption of the drug and the form of the drug ingested (tablet, capsule, liquid, etc.). Rates of metabolism also differ from individual to individual as determined by genetics and other environmental factors. Almost always, the metabolites of the original drug will have a different effect on the body region it targets than the original form of the drug. Sometimes, metabolism renders a drug completely inactive and it passes harmlessly out of the body but in other cases, the metabolite might be just as active as the original drug although it may target a slightly different body region or use a different pathway to achieve its effect. It is also possible for the original drug to be ingested in an inactive form that must be metabolized by the liver before it becomes active and has any effect on the body region that it targets. The effects of orally ingested drugs usually have a delayed onset when compared to other methods of drug delivery because of the additional time required for the drug to pass through the digestive tract, be absorbed by the blood stream, and metabolized by the liver.
Pathway #1
Drugs Taken Orally→
Digestive Track→
Blood Stream→
Liver→
Body Region
They Effect→
Liver →
Kidneys →
Excreted
Drugs that are injected or are absorbed through body membranes pass immediately into the blood stream and travel directly to the body region they affect. Then, as the blood continues to circulate through the body, the drugs will pass through the liver and begin to be metabolized.
Pathway #2
Drugs Injected or
Absorbed Through →
Body Membranes
Blood Stream →
Body Region
They Affect →
Liver →
Kidneys →
Excreted
Once the drug travels to the region of the body that it affects, it may also be broken down by that organ or system. Every time the blood circulates through the body, more and more of the drug is broken down by the liver and is eventually transported to the kidneys and excreted into the urine. The overall length of time that it takes the body to completely metabolize a drug into an inactive metabolite determines how long an individual will experience an effect from that drug. Therefore, forensic toxicologists may look for a drug or the breakdown products of a drug in three areas:
the blood
the urine
the target region
