To prove that arson was the cause of a fire, investigators look for evidence in the following four areas:
Proof of Incendiarism: Fire investigators classify the cause of a fire as natural, accidental, unknown, or incendiary. An incendiary fire is one deliberately set by an arsonist. To classify a fire, investigators first try to locate the origin of the fire. To do this, photographs and diagrams of burn patterns are made and physical evidence is collected and analyzed at the fire scene. The origin of the fire along with other physical evidence can help determine the cause and the approximate time the fire was ignited.
Proof of Opportunity: To identify suspects in arson investigation, fire investigators consider everyone who had opportunity to set the fire. They examine building security. Everyone with access to the site before the fire is asked to provide an alibi for the period of the fire. If all alibis are confirmed, investigators conclude that the arsonist must have gained access to the site illegally; consequently, other evidence must be used to identify the suspects(s).
Proof of Motive: Arsonists set fires for several reasons, such as financial gain, revenge, crime concealment, or vandalism. An owner may become a suspect if he or she gained financially from properties destroyed by fire in the past or if he or she is having financial difficulties and stands to gain from an insurance claim for the property under investigation. Investigators examine the owner’s current insurance policies, insurance history, and current financial situation.
Circumstantial Evidence: Because the evidence related to arson is often circumstantial, investigators collect as many different types of evidence as possible to support their case. Following is a list of several types of evidence that investigators may use to support their case:
On-site fire or burglar detection systems are inspected for evidence of malfunction or tampering.
If the fire was reported, the identity of the caller is determined and a background check is completed.
The license plates of automobiles in the area surrounding the fire may be checked.
Previous police activity conducted in the area is reviewed, as well as any reports of vandalism.
Hospitals in the local area may be asked if any patients with fire-related injuries were treated soon after the fire was set.
If an accelerant is identified, investigators may question local gas stations or hardware stores to see if a similar accelerant (such as gasoline or paint thinner) was purchased locally.
