Crime Case Study: Tear Gas - The 1997 APEC Summit
In 1997, world leaders met in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada for the ninth annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) conference. The APEC conference is a forum for twenty-one Pacific Rim countries that represent about 60% of the world's economy to discuss the regional economies, cooperation, trade, and investment. The 1997 conference was held at the picturesque University of British Columbia (UBC) campus.
Security for the high-profile APEC conference was provided exclusively by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP). Shortly after the APEC conference began, a protest with a large number of people (mostly UBC students) erupted. The protestors carried signs and were angry that human rights issues were not being discussed by APEC dignitaries. Protestors were especially bothered by the presence of lndonesian President Suharto because of his poor human rights record.
When RCMP officers tried to clear an area of protestors, chaos occurred. After protestors tore down a fence, RCMP officers reacted by tearing down protest signs and releasing pepper spray into the crowd. Initially, this tactic by police resulted in a great deal of confusion, but eventually it led to the dispersion of the crowds. When asked by a reporter if he knew about the incident, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien claimed he knew nothing by saying "For me, pepper, I put it on my plate." After the incident, a number of complaints were filed by various groups alleging that RCMP officers used excessive force and suggesting that Prime Minister Chretien and his aides encouraged police to use extraordinary measures to keep protestors at bay. In 1998, the RCMP Public Complaints Commission began an inquiry about the use of pepper spray at the 1997 APEC conference. The Commission lasted for more than 160 days and heard from more than 150 witnesses.
The 453-page final report written by the RCMP Public Complaints Commission indicated that there was improper involvement by the federal government, but it stopped short of implicating Prime Minister Chretien directly. The final report also judged that RCMP Staff Sergeant Hugh Stewart made an unfortunate decision by ordering the use of pepper spray on the protestors. However, the report indicated that this decision was the result of poor planning by the RCMP and time constraints. This incident did not cause Staff Sergeant Hugh Stewart to lose his job. On the contrary, in 2002, he was promoted to the rank of Sergeant Major.
