For a compound to be considered explosive, it must react rapidly when exposed to heat or shock and it must produce gas and heat rapidly. An explosion is the oxidation and combustion of at least two unstable substances that produces a violent reaction.
Two general types of explosives are labelled high and low. Each is categorized by how quickly the explosive compound ignites and how fast the chemical reaction occurs. The speed of the chemical reaction that generates each type of explosion influences various other aspects of the blast.
Low explosives are sensitive to heat, friction, and temperature. The speed of the shock waves generated by a low explosive blast is approximately 2300 metres per second. Low explosive materials are usually lethal only when confined to a sealed container in which a huge increase in pressure occurs. Generally, explosives used in criminal activities are low explosives because they are small and are often created with easy-to-find materials such as fertilizer, gunpowder, or gasoline. Examples of low explosives include pipe bombs, car bombs, gunpowder, flares, and illumination devices.
High explosives tend to be larger, more complex, and more powerful. They also have a much greater speed of reaction than low explosives. Because high explosives react so quickly, the build-up of pressure and gas is almost instantaneous. High explosives tend to be less sensitive to heat, friction, and temperature. They create powerful shock waves that have speeds of up to 6900 metres per second. Examples of high explosives include compounds such as nitroglycerin and TNT. Both of these explosives are used for mining and demolition and are used in military warheads.
Eric Robert Rudolph is an American anti-abortion and anti-gay extremist and domestic terrorist who committed a series of bombings across the southern United States in the late 1990s. His most notorious bombing was in Atlanta during the 1996 Summer Olympics when Rudolph detonated a pipe bomb killing one person and wounding 111 others. Rudolph also bombed two abortion clinics and a gay nightclub in Atlanta in 1997 and 1998. These bombings injured five people and killed two others. The bombs used in each incident were made of dynamite surrounded by nails. The Rudolph family believed Eric was innocent of all charges. In a strange show of support, Eric’s older brother videotaped himself cutting off one of his own hands with a radial arm saw.
A ‘dirty bomb’ is a radiological weapon (RDD) that combines radioactive material with conventional explosives. RDDs are designed to disperse radioactive material over a large area.
Saltpetre is composed of the ionic compound potassium nitrate. Saltpetre is found naturally in limestone caves and is used to make matches, gunpowder, explosives, and fertilizers.
