Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
Module 4 Assignment: Forensic Ballistics
/42
Lesson A: Firearm Basics
1. Describe two differences between a bullet and acartridge. (2 marks)
2. Discuss why bullets and their casings are oftenfound in different locations at crime scenes. (2
marks)
3. Using your knowledge of velocity, kinetic energy,and trajectory, explain how a handgun round
becomes less effective than a rifle bullet over longdistances. (3 marks)
4. Explain why a police tactical unit always takesat least one assault rifle or sniper rifle when
responding to a call involving a suspect armed witha gun. (2 marks)
Lesson B: Ballistic Fingerprinting and Wound Ballistics
5. Identify three unique characteristics that a forensicballistic expert might analyze while
examining a bullet and a cartridge casing to determinethe type of gun used at a crime scene.
(3 marks)
6. Police officers are trained to shoot at centremass when faced with lethal threat encounters.
Centre mass is considered to be the centre of thechest or the breastbone region.  Use your
knowledge of wound ballistics to explain why theyare trained to aim for this part of the human
1

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
body. (2 marks)
Use the following information to answer question 7.
A 20-year old male armed with a handgun shot a rivalgang member twice at close range.
The victim suffered two large gunshot wounds—one tohis left arm and a second wound
that severed the large femoral artery in the upperportion of his left leg. Each bullet
expanded upon entry and neither bullet exited thevictim’s body.
7. a. Identify the type of bullet that likely causedthese injuries.  Explain your choice. (2 marks).
b. Explain which of the two gunshot wounds most likelycaused the victim’s death. (2 mark)
8. Discuss how the injuries to President Kennedy andGovernor Connally would have been
different if Lee Harvey Oswald had used a handguninstead of a rifle. (3 marks)
Lesson C.  Testing for Gunshot Residue
Use the information below to answer questions 9 and10.
A piece of gauze turns a scarlet red colour afterbeing swabbed over the hands of a
murder suspect.
9. a.Before it was swabbed over the suspect’s hands,what substance was the gauze dipped
into? (1 mark)
b. What specific element was detected in this test?.(1 mark)
2

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
c. Identify whether the element detected in this test was from a propellant or a primer.  Justify
your choice. (2 marks)
10. Why is the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)being used more frequently in GSR testing?
(2 marks)
Both the Paraffin test and Harrison-Gilroy test areperformed on an armed robbery
suspect. The paraffin test is positive for nitrites,and the Harrison-Gilroy test is positive
for antimony. X-ray analysis with a scanning electronmicroscope confirms the results of
both tests.
11. Can the combined results of these three testsensure a conviction in court? (3 marks)
Lesson D. Case Study Involving Forensic Ballistics
Case Study #1: The Beltway Snipers
12. Explain why no intact bullets were found at anyof the Beltway sniper shootings. (3 marks)
Military snipers are trained to shoot at and hit targetsfrom great distances, typically 500
to 1000 metres.
13. Considering the range at which most of the shootingstook place, why have some military
experts criticized the media’s use of the labelBeltwaySniper? (3 marks)
Case Study #2: Distance, Shielding, and Movement CriticalIncident Response
14. A security guard arrests a man at a shopping mallafter he is caught trying to steal clothing.
When police arrive, they suspect he is one of thethree suspects from the convenience store
robbery and murder. How could GSR testing help toconfirm their suspicions? (3 marks)
3

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
15. Describe three reasons police officers confrontingan armed suspect should know the type of
firearm the suspect is carrying (3 marks)
4
