Module 1 Assignment: Forensic Toxicology



/68



Lesson A: The Effects of Illegal Drugs upon the Human Body



Use the following information to answer the next question.



Body Parts and Fluids in which Psychoactive Drugs are Found:



1. CNS

2. Liver

3. Urine

4. Blood

5. Kidneys



The correct sequence of body parts and fluids, as numbered above, through

which psychoactive drugs travel when taken by injection is ______ , ______ ,

______ , ______ , and ______. (2 marks)



4, 1, 2, 5, 3



Physiological Effects of Psychoactive Drug Abuse:



1. Confusion, insomnia, and impotence

2. Inflammation of heart lining and skin abscesses

3. Disruption of blood flow and increased chance of infection

4. Impairment of one’s ability to operate a motor vehicle



Match each physiological effect numbered above with the psychoactive drugs

given below by placing the number in the effects column. (2 marks)



Psychoactive drug:           	Effects:

cocaine

1

opiates

3

marijuana

4

amphetamines

2









a. Identify three body parts and/or fluids in which forensic toxicologists are most likely to find psychoactive drugs or their breakdown products? (3 marks)

Response should include any three of the following: sweat, blood, urine, CNS, liver, or kidneys.



b. Psychoactive drugs can also be detected in saliva. Explain why saliva samples are not used regularly by law enforcement officials to detect drug impairment in drivers. (2 marks)

Response should include any two of the following: • No reliable roadside measurement device exists. • Under present laws, saliva analysis is inadmissible as evidence in court. • Test results are not as reliable as those for blood and/or urine. Too many false positive identifications result. • Present saliva tests cannot conclude the quantity of drug—only its presence. 



Compare and contrast illegal depressants and stimulants in the following ways: 

a. One way that each affects neural activity (2 marks)

Either of the following answers is acceptable for 1 mark.

• Some depressants prevent the release of neurotransmitters, which stops neural stimulation.

• Some depressants mimic neurotransmitters that prevent pain.

Either of the following answers is acceptable for another mark to bring the total up to 2.

• Some stimulants prevent the breakdown of neurotransmitters, causing neurons to fire continuously.

• Some stimulants mimic the effects of certain neurotransmitters, causing neurons to fire continuously



b. The general symptoms caused by each (2 marks)

• The general symptoms caused by depressants include drowsiness, sleep, insensitivity, and relaxation. (1 mark)

• The general symptoms caused by stimulants include increased alertness, increased

 metabolism, hyperactivity, stimulation of sexual arousal, and prevention of hunger. (1 mark)





State one possible reason drug-testing devices are not widely used by Canadian law enforcement agencies today. (2 marks)

Any of the following answers is acceptable for 2 marks:

Drug-testing devices are not widely used by Canadian law enforcement agencies today for several reasons:

• They are time consuming because drug-testing of urine and /or blood must be done in a hospital setting. They cannot be done on the roadside or at a police station.

• No legislation currently exists that allows for roadside drug-testing.

• The results are not 100% accurate. Some false positive results do occur.

• Suspects cannot be forced to take a drug test. They must do so voluntarily.







Lesson B. The Effects of Poisons and Toxins



Use the following information to answer the next question.



Descriptions of Four Groups of Substances 



1. harmful compound that is produced in a living organism 

2. produced by animals and cause its effect through injection 

3. chemical compound causing harmful effects after being absorbed into a body

4. products relief or prevents the effects of a harmful substance 



6. Match the descriptions shown above with the names given below (2 marks)



 Substance:	         Definition:

   poison

3

toxin

1

venom

2

antidote

4





Deadly Effects Caused by Various Poisons 



1. inhibits ATP production in the brain, spinal cord, and heart 

2. prevents oxygen from binding to hemoglobin in red blood cells 

3. after intense muscle spasms, stops activity in the medulla oblongata 

4. causes multi-organ failure by preventing enzyme and mitochondrial activity 



7. Match each description shown above with the poisons given below (2 marks)



	       Poison:				Effects:

arsenic

4

cyanide

1

strychnine

3

carbon monoxide

2





 8. a. Describe the harmful effects poison can have on the body. (2 marks)

Any two of the following:

• inhibit chemical reactions in the body

• organ damage

• inhibit activity in medulla oblongata

• blocks amino acid receptors in brain and spinal cord

• inhibit enzyme activity

• inhibit ATP production• brain damage, birth defects, weight loss, sluggishness, vomiting, skin rash, abnormal heart beat

• prevents oxygen from attaching to the hemoglobin molecules within red blood cells.

• burning in throat

• nausea

• stomach cramps

• muscle spasms

• stop the heart and lungs

• increases hydrogen peroxide production



b. Identify the two main ways poisons tend to be absorbed into the body. (2 marks)

1 mark each

• ingestion and/or eating

• inhalation and/or breathing





9. Explain why poisoning deaths do not always involve the consumption of true poisons. (3 marks)

Deaths due to poisonings do not always involve the consumption of true poisons. Rather they might be caused by the accidental or intentional overdose of a substance not actually considered a poison (such as Aspirin, alcohol, or household cleaners).  





10. Discuss why homicides caused by intentional poisonings are rare. (3 marks)

• the most potent and easy-to-disguise poisons are not readily available to the average consumer.  

• Intentional poisonings take much planning and preparation because the killer requires some knowledge of the precise amount of poison necessary to cause death. 





11. a. Why is the actual number of poisonings in North America unknown? (2 marks)

The actual number of poisonings is unknown because not all cases of poisonings are detected or reported.





b. How does the cause of reported poisonings compare to the cause of poisonings causing death? (3 marks)

The majority of reported poisonings are accidental overdoses in children  

The majority of poisonings causing death are intentional suicides  





c. What substance is the most frequent cause of reported poisonings? (1 mark)

Most frequent cause of reported poisonings = household cleaners





d. What substance is the most frequent cause of poisonings resulting in death? (1 mark)

Most frequent cause of death by poisoning = antidepressant drugs





Lesson C. Forensic Toxicology Testing Techniques



Use the following list to answer the next question:



Various Steps in Gas Chromatography



1. A chromatogram is created using a computer. 

2. Isolated sample and gas are injected into tubing. 

3. Diffusion of isolated sample and gas into a liquid. 

4. Isolated sample is placed in heated injection chamber. 

5. Chemical components of isolated sample enter a detector.





12. The correct sequence of stops involved in gas chromatography, as shown above, are (2 marks)

4, 2, 3, 5, 1









Use the following list to answer the next question.



Some Descriptions of Toxicology Testing Techniques 



1. A chemical reaction may occur to produce a crystalline precipitate. 

2. Small test strips are placed in a urine sample and a change in colour occurs. 

3. A fragmentation pattern is created from substance’s unique chemical composition. 

4. Drug-specific antibodies are added to an isolated sample and a reaction is observed. 



13. Match each description shown above with the correct toxicological testing technique given  below. (2 marks)



	Testing Techniques:		Descriptions:

immunoassay

4

microcrystalline

1

colour testing

2

mass spectrometry

3







14. Explain how the testing for drugs or poisons from a living person differ from the testing for drugs or poisons from a dead person. (3 marks)

Blood, hair, saliva, sweat, and urine may be analyzed in a living suspect or victim.

All of the above as well as bone, brain tissues, liver tissues, and stomach contents can be analyzed in a dead suspect or victim.





15. Explain three reasons the initial screening for drugs or poisons must be followed by  confirmation testing. Indicate which tests have these problems. (6 marks)

• Colour testing and microcrystalline testing do not indicate the quantity of the suspected substance. (2 marks)

• Colour testing and microcrystalline tests do not exist for all the drugs, poisons, and toxins. (2 marks)

• In immunoassay testing and gas chromatography testing, some organic substances have similar chemical structures to certain drugs, toxins, and poisons. These substances may produce false positive results. (2 marks)



16. Why is mass spectrometry considered the most accurate method of confirmation testing in forensic toxicology? (3 marks)

• Every drug, toxin, or poison produces a distinct fragmentation pattern according to its unique individual chemical structure.  

• No two patterns are exactly alike.  











Lesson D: Crime Case Studies Involving Forensic Toxicology 



Case Study #1: The Poisoning of a Politician



Use the following information to answer the next question. 



Various Dioxin Poisoning Symptoms 



1. cancer 

2. nausea 

3. diabetes 

4. vomiting 

5. heart disease 

6. liver damage 

7. abdominal pain 

8. swollen pancreas 



(Record your four-digit answer in descending order.) 



17. Some of the long-term effects that Viktor Yushchenko could suffer from because of the dioxin he ingested include _____ , _____ , _____ , and _____ . (2 marks)

6, 5, 3, 1



18. a. Explain why small amounts of dioxin are found in every human’s blood. (2 marks)

Dioxins are found in a wide-range of common substances (i.e. food packaging, tampons, etc.) All people receive a small daily dose of dioxins; however, such small dosages do not seem to pose any health hazards. 



b. State how much dioxin Victor Yushchenko had in his bloodstream as compared to the average individual. (1 mark)

Viktor Yushchenko had 1000 times the normal amount of dioxin in his blood.





Case Study #2: The Jonestown Tragedy 



1. coma 

2. heart attack 

3. convulsions 

4. loss of consciousness 



(Record your four-digit answer in descending order.) 







19.  The correct sequence of events, as numbered above, that each Jonestown poisoning victim would have experienced before death is _____ , _____ , _____ , and _____ . (2 marks)

4, 3, 1, 2





20. a. Whose visit to Jim Jones’ colony in Guyana in November 1978 precipitated the mass suicide/mass murder? (1 mark)

US Congressman Leo Ryan, his aides, family members of some residents and various media visited Jonestown.





b. Explain why this person paid a visit to Jim Jones’ colony? (2 marks)

US Congressman Leo Ryan went to Guyana because allegations of human right abuses had been made. A possibility was that people were being held against their will in Jonestown.





Case Study #3: Was it a Drug Overdose or an Intentional Poisoning - That is the Question?



Use the following information to answer the next question. 



Various Types of Drugs and Poisons

 

1. arsenic

2. cocaine 

3. marijuana 

4. strychnine 

5. amobarbital 

6. secobarbital 

7. Pentobarbital



(Record your four-digit answer in descending order.) 



21.  The chromatogram of the victim’s blood (sample evidence #2) indicates that he had ingested _____ , _____ , and _____ . (2 marks)

7, 4, 3





22. Did the male victim in this case die due to a drug overdose or due to intentional poisoning? Support your choice with four pieces of evidence. (4 marks)

Intentional poisoning (1 mark) - any 4 of the following are acceptable -



• eyes wide open

• rigor mortis of legs and arms

• thrashing about the room/struggle

• suicide note can’t be authenticated

• syringe present even though crack cocaine, marijuana and barbituates don’t use a syringe

• rat poison found in dumpster (no fingerprints)

• small puncture wound
