Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
Module 5 Assignment: Criminal Profiling
/41
Lesson A: Creating a Criminal Profile
1. To create a criminal profile, with what do profilerscompare the information from a crime? (2
marks)
2. Explain why a criminal profile may be altered afterit has been completed. (2 marks)
3. What was George Metesky’s motive for setting numerousexplosive devices around New York
City? (2 marks)
4. Discuss how Dr. James Brussel’s profile helpedto catch theMad Bomber. (2 marks)
Lesson B: The Use of Criminal Profiling in HomicideInvestigations
5. Identify four pieces of evidence that support theassumption that Ted Bundy was an organized
offender. (4 marks)
6. Identify four pieces of evidence that support theassumption that Richard Trenton Chase was a
disorganized offender.  (4 marks)
1

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
7. Identify four pieces of evidence (two must be organizedtraits and two must be disorganized
traits) that support the assumption that Jeffrey Dahmerwas a combination offender? (4 marks).
Lesson C.  Geographic Profiling
8. What did Canadian Dr. Kim Rossmo contribute tothe field of geographic profiling? (2 marks)
9.  List six data sources used in the constructionof a geographic profile.(3 marks)
10. Identify a criminal investigation where geographicprofiling did not help to apprehend a
suspect. Explain why geographic profiling was notsuccessful in this case. (3 marks)
11. Describe a criminal investigation where geographicprofiling was proven accurate or helped
to apprehend a suspect directly. (3 marks)
Lesson D. Criminal Profiling in Homicide Crime CaseStudies
Case Study #1: The Railway Killers
12. a. After John Duffy was convicted of murder andrape, what information did he reveal to a
psychologist that was surprising to police? (1 mark)
2

Forensic Studies 35-3
Name:
b. What did this revelation lead to? (1 mark)
13. How did criminal profiling lead to the arrestof one of the Railway Killers? (3 marks)
Case Study #2: The BTK Strangler
14. Explain whether the BTK Strangler was an organizedor disorganized offender (2 marks)
15. a. Identify the person in Dennis Lynn Rader familywho helped police arrest him.(1 mark)
b. Describe exactly how this family member helpedinvestigators? (2 marks)
3
