Forensic Toxicology Overview
The sale and distribution of illegal drugs involves a global black market with an estimated retail value totalling more than US$ 320 billion. Law enforcement agencies have engaged in attempts to prevent the distribution and sale of illegal drugs since the growing problem was first recognized in the early 1960s.
Financial incentives drive the sale of illegal drugs: dealers want to get rich and be powerful. The result is often high levels of property crime, murder, and social disorder. Law enforcement agencies, therefore, work towards reducing the extent of the drug trade to prevent such crimes from becoming more frequent..
Each year, numerous injuries and deaths result from the use of illegal drugs. Forensic toxicology plays an important role in the investigation of such incidents and their related crimes.
The ingestion of a poison or toxin (usually by swallowing or injecting) can lead to life-threatening injuries and/or death. Ingestion may be accidental or deliberate, and it includes cases of suicide and murder. Accidental poisonings and suicidal acts stemming from the consumption of poisons and/or toxins are non-criminal matters. The deliberate poisoning of an individual or group of persons is a criminal matter that will typically result in a police investigation. The science of forensic toxicology has an important role in successfully investigating and prosecuting such crimes.
Module Learner Objectives
By the end of Module 1, you should be able to…
appreciate that the field of forensic toxicology involves the identification of various types of drug(s) and/or poison(s) found within an individual’s system
recognize that illegal drugs have harmful side-effects upon the human body
review the harmful effects of various types of illegal psychoactive drugs upon the human body (e.g., opiates, marijuana, barbiturates, cocaine, amphetamines)
recognize that the illegal drug trade has a direct relationship upon other crimes and that it causes social disorder
discuss the dangers of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of drugs and the need for drug testing devices for police officers
recognize that drugs, poisons, and toxins are extracted from the body using procedures that involve acid-base extraction
understand the mechanics of various toxicology testing procedures used to screen for drugs or poisons (e.g., color testing, microcrystalline testing, immunoassay testing, gas chromatography)
explain how the toxicological testing technique of mass spectrometry is used to confirm the presence of specific drugs or poisons within the human body
identify various types of poisons (e.g., cyanide, carbon monoxide, arsenic, strychnine) and their harmful side-effects upon the human body
analyze historical crime cases and/or fictional crime cases that involves forensic toxicology
