Chapter 16  Cellular Reproduction • MHR  561
1. What three functions does mitosis serve in your body?
2. In which phase of mitosis does each of the following 
events occur?
a) migration of sister chromatids to opposite poles
b) condensation of chromatin into compact 
chromosomes 
c) formation of a nuclear membrane
d) alignment of chromosomes along the cell equator
3. Sketch the four phases of mitosis. Include labels to 
explain what is happening in each phase.
4. What role does the spindle apparatus play in cell division?
 5. Brieﬂ y explain the link between cell cycle regulation 
and cancer.
 6. The scientists in a lab have isolated a substance that 
prevents cells from synthesizing microtubules. What 
impact would this substance have on cell division? Explain.
 7. A scientist studying a group of somatic cells notices that 
upon the completion of the cell cycle half of the daughter 
cells have no chromosomes and the other half have 
92 chromosomes. In what phase of mitosis did an 
error most likely occur? Explain your reasoning.
Review
Section  16.2
mass of non-functional cells, called a 
tumour. In Chapter 18, you will learn 
more about some of the speciﬁ c genetic 
events that can lead to cancer.
Applying Knowledge of Mitosis
Many of the studies of cell division have 
used tissues from non-human organisms, 
such as yeasts, frogs, and fruit ﬂ ies. 
Because the processes of cell division are 
similar in all eukaryotes, these studies 
have applications for human cells as well. 
Many non-human tissues offer important 
advantages for laboratory investigations. 
The embryo cells of some species of frog, 
for example, are large enough that 
researchers can micro-inject proteins 
and other substances directly into the 
dividing cells to study the effects. In 
more recent years, the study of cell 
division has shifted to the roles of 
individual genes in triggering speciﬁ c 
events. The fruit ﬂ y, Drosophila 
melanogaster, has proven to be a useful 
model organism for these studies because 
its genetic material contains counterparts 
to many of the human genes involved in 
regulating the cell cycle. 
 
Since the ﬁ rst observations of 
dividing cells in the late 1800s, new 
microscopes and staining techniques 
have advanced our understanding of the 
cell cycle. For example, scientists can 
now tag individual protein molecules 
with ﬂ uorescent dyes to track the 
movements and reactions of proteins 
at different stages of the cell cycle. New 
types of light microscopes provide 
improved live images of cell division at 
work. These technologies have helped 
researchers learn more about the complex 
interactions of signals and processes that 
are involved in the cell cycle.
Section 16.2 Summary
• Mitosis involves a precise sequence 
of events. 
• These events are grouped into four 
phases: prophase, metaphase, 
anaphase, and telophase. 
• Each phase is deﬁ ned by a particular 
arrangement of chromosomes within 
the dividing cell. Telophase is followed 
by cytokinesis.
• The cell cycle is carefully regulated by 
speciﬁ c regulatory signals. Interference 
with these signals can result in 
uncontrolled cell division and the 
development of cancer. 
