558  MHR • Unit 7  Cell Division, Genetics, and Molecular Biology
chromosomes into the cytoplasm. The 
nucleolus disappears. One pair of 
cylindrical organelles, called centrioles, 
moves apart to opposite poles of the cell. 
As the centrioles move apart, a network 
of ﬁ bres called the spindle apparatus 
forms between them. Each spindle ﬁ bre 
is made of microtubules—hollow tubes 
of protein that facilitate movement of 
chromosomes within a cell. A spindle ﬁ bre 
lengthens with the addition of microtubule 
subunits. The removal of these subunits 
causes a spindle ﬁ bre to shorten.
Metaphase 
The second phase of mitosis is called 
metaphase. During metaphase, the 
spindle ﬁ bres guide the chromosomes 
to the equator, or centre line, of the cell. 
The spindle ﬁ bres from opposite poles 
attach to the centromere of each 
chromosome. The spindle ﬁ bres attach 
in such a way that one sister chromatid 
faces one pole, while the other sister 
chromatid faces the opposite pole. 
(By convention, each pair of sister 
chromatids is considered to be a single 
chromosome as long as the chromatids 
remain joined at the centromere.)
Anaphase
The third phase of mitosis is called 
anaphase. During anaphase, each 
centromere splits apart and the sister 
chromatids separate from one another. The 
spindle ﬁ bres that link the centromeres 
to the poles of the cell shorten. As these 
ﬁ bres shorten, sister chromatids are 
pulled to opposite poles. At the same 
time, other microtubules in the spindle 
apparatus lengthen and force the poles 
of the cell away from one another. At the 
end of anaphase, one complete diploid 
set of chromosomes has been gathered 
at each pole of the elongated cell.
Telophase
The fourth and ﬁ nal phase of mitosis is 
called telophase. Telophase begins when 
the chromatids have reached the opposite 
poles of the cell. The chromatids begin to 
unwind into the longer and less visible 
strands of chromatin. The spindle ﬁ bres 
break down. A nuclear membrane forms 
around each new set of chromosomes, and 
a nucleolus forms within each new nucleus.
Cytokinesis
Mitosis is the process of nuclear division. 
It is followed by cytokinesis, which is 
division of the cytoplasm to complete 
the creation of two new daughter cells. 
During cytokinesis in animal cells, an 
indentation forms in the cell membrane 
along the cell equator. This indentation 
deepens until the cell is pinched in two. 
The cytoplasm and organelles divide 
equally between the two halves of the 
cell. Cytokinesis ends with the separation 
of the two genetically identical daughter 
cells. The daughter cells are now in G1 
of interphase.
2
  What are the four phases of 
mitosis?
2
  List the key events that happen 
to chromosomes in each phase.
• • •
• • •
Mitosis and Cytokinesis 
in Plant Cells
In the mid-1800s, scientists observed 
that the phases of cell division are very 
similar in plants and animals. The 
observation that plants and animals 
share this basic process of life caused a 
philosophical shift toward recognizing 
the unity of living things. At the same 
time, however, scientists recognized that 
the structural differences between plant 
cells and animal cells lead to some 
differences in cell division:
• Plant cells do not have centrioles, but 
they do form a spindle apparatus. 
• The rigid cell wall of a plant cell is 
much stronger than the membrane 
of an animal cell. The cell wall does not 
furrow and pinch in during cytokinesis. 
Instead, a membrane called a cell plate 
forms between the two daughter nuclei 
BiologyFile
 
Try This
Cells invest a great deal 
of energy and materials 
into condensing long 
chromatin strands into short 
chromosomes. Why do you 
think the genetic material 
does not simply stay in 
one form or the other 
throughout the cell cycle? 
Discuss your ideas with 
a partner.
