Connections
Nature of Science
Nature of Science
562  MHR • Unit 7  Cell Division, Genetics, and Molecular Biology
 
The discovery in 1986 that birds could regenerate 
hair cells in their ears after trauma—and thus could 
regain hearing—gives hope that deafness in humans 
can be reversed.
 
The organ of Corti is located in the cochlea of the 
inner ear and contains two types of cells: hair cells, and 
supporting cells, which nourish hair cells. Outer organ 
of Corti hair cells detect sound. In the innermost part of 
the organ of Corti, hair cells turn auditory input into an 
electrical signal, which is then sent to the brain via the 
auditory nerve. 
 
In birds, remaining support cells receive a signal to 
divide into daughter cells by mitosis and cytokinesis after 
hair cells die. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
molecules that encourage the survival of nervous tissue 
are understood to promote this process in birds. After cell 
division, support daughter cells receive a signal to change 
into hair cells by transdifferentiation—a process whereby 
a non-stem cell develops into another kind of cell.
 
Initially, scientists doubted this kind of regeneration 
could occur in mammals. However, laboratory studies on 
pigs, mice, rats, guinea pigs, and humans have shown that 
when hair cells are destroyed, a small amount of support 
cells grew in the tissue of the inner ear. This offers hope 
that human hearing loss can one day be reversed, if the 
mechanism that causes support cells to grow into hair 
cells can be further manipulated.
 
One method that has been used to support cell 
regeneration involves the use of growth factors. These are 
hormone-like chemicals that control the growth of cells. 
Another method of support cell regeneration is gene 
therapy, which introduces specialized growth genes into 
the support cell through a specially made virus. The 
reasoning is that if a growth factor or gene therapy is 
successful, it will trigger cell division. Then, support cells 
will regenerate into hair cells and potentially restore hearing.
 
While progress so far is encouraging, barriers remain. 
Scientists are only beginning to identify and test growth 
factors that may play a role in regeneration. Furthermore, 
hair cells must “know” where and how much to grow. 
Cell growth must be controlled, since uncontrolled 
growth could result in tumors. Finally, for a hair cell 
to be useful, it must connect with the auditory nerve.
• • •
 1. Research and describe three common causes of non-
congenital (not present at birth) hearing impairment. 
What steps can you take to prevent hearing loss?
 2. Retinoblastoma (Rb) is a protein that prevents cells 
from multiplying. Research with Rb with respect 
to support cell regeneration. How could an 
understanding of retinoblastoma contribute 
to a cure for nerve deafness?
Magnification: 2905 ×
This colourized scanning electron micrograph of a healthy 
human inner ear shows hair cells (brownish-pink) and the 
feathery projections, called stereocilia (pink) at their ends. 
Unlike hair cells in some other animals, human hair cells are 
unable to regenerate naturally if they are damaged.
Regenerating the Sense of Hearing?
Nerve deafness, the most common form of hearing loss, is caused by damage or loss 
of hair cells in the inner ear. Until recently, scientists assumed that hearing loss due 
to nerve deafness was irreversible. Treatments to aid the hearing impaired, such as 
hearing aids and cochlear implants, are not designed to re-grow hair cells.
