Characteristics of Modern Drama Before film and television, theatre was one of the predominant forms of entertainment. A theatrical performance has the ability to bring all kinds of stories to life, due to the presence of real people performing directly in front of the audience. Consider: What makes writing drama challenging for playwrights? How does writing plays differ from writing other literary forms? Why does the playwright choose drama as the genre to develop his ideas? How would the work be different if it were presented as a short story or novel? Characteristics of Modern Drama: As a form of narrative, a modern drama has all the usual story elements: plot, character, theme, setting, atmosphere, and so on. Different elements may be emphasized but character is always important. A modern drama may include symbols or motifs, just like other narratives. A prop might have a symbolic value; through repetition, a word, phrase, or gesture might become a motif that helps to unify the play and express its theme. Drama is meant to be seen or heard, instead of being read like short stories and novels. Because of this, the framework of a play is the action and the dialogue. Plays performed on stage by skilled actors come alive as we see and hear the characters and the action. How to Read and Interpret the Modern Drama: Become familiar with the list of characters. Note any details about how characters are related to each other. Look for stereotypes in the way the characters are portrayed. Consider how the main characters change as a result of the action of the drama. These changes are usually keys to the underlying theme of the play. Approach the plot of the play as you would a short story. Look for the central conflict in the story. Predict what will happen as the action unfolds. Is the resolution to the plot satisfying? Be prepared to read the play more than once, in order to appreciate the subtle nuances of the work. Borrow the CD or audio-tape of the play from your local library. You will then have the advantage of hearing professional actors bring characters to life.
