Scene 3 Overview Cliff notes Scene 3 Summary Later that night Mitch, Stanley's friend, wants to drop out of the poker game because his mother is sick. Stella and Blanche return from the show, and Blanche is introduced to the other players. When Stanley tells the ladies to disappear until the game is finished, Stella reminds him that it is 2:30 A.M. and time to quit. Stanley swats her rear and the sisters go into the other room, where Blanche meets Harold Mitchell coming from the bathroom. When he leaves, Blanche thinks that he looks more sensitive than the others and is told that Mitch's mother is very sick. Blanche begins to undress until Stella reminds her that she is in the light. The sisters begin to laugh, and Stanley yells to them to be quiet. When Stella goes to the bathroom, Blanche moves back into the light and continues to undress as she listens to rumba music over the radio. Stanley calls for her to turn the radio off. Mitch excuses himself again and goes into the other room, where he meets Blanche again. She asks him for a cigarette, and he shows her his cigarette case with an inscription on it. Blanche recognizes the inscription and Mitch is pleased and explains that there is a story connected with the case. It was given to him by a girl who was dying and knew it when she gave him the present. Blanche explains that people who suffer are often more sensitive and sincere than the average person. Blanche asks Mitch to cover the light bulb with a paper lantern because she can't "stand a naked light bulb, any more than a rude remark or a vulgar action." After more conversation, Blanche explains how she tried to teach English and an appreciation for literature to youngsters who were not interested in it. As Stella comes out of the bathroom, Blanche turns on the radio and begins a little waltz, and Mitch clumsily tries to follow when suddenly Stanley charges into the room and throws the radio out the window. Stella screams at him and tells everyone to go home. Stanley becomes enraged and hits Stella. The men pin Stanley down while the women leave. They force him under the shower and then leave. Stanley emerges and calls Eunice and asks to speak to Stella. He threatens to keep on calling until he talks with Stella. Then he goes outside and bellows for her. Eunice comes out and tells him to be quiet because Stella is not coming down. He continues to yell for her, and Stella emerges from the apartment and comes slowly to him. He falls to his knees and presses her against him. He then carries her back into the apartment. Blanche comes looking for Stella. She sees Mitch who explains that Stella went back to him. Mitch assures her that all is fine now. Blanche looks at him and thanks him for being so kind. Analysis Note that the scene is set against a pretty wild poker game. Stanley is especially out of patience because he has been losing heavily. And we see Mitch immediately as a contrast to the others, especially with his concern for his sick mother. Cliff notes Scene 3
