Case Study 10
The Milgram Obedience Experiments

In July 1961, Stanley Milgram, a 28-year-old recent Ph.D. graduate from Harvard, began
a series of obedience experiments.  He was conducting social psychology research
regarding the external social forces that, though subtle, have surprisingly powerful effects
on human behavior.

The Experiment
Participants in the study were told they were part of an experiment researching the
relationship between punishment and learning.  A “lead” experimenter, who did not
coerce or compel the participants in any way, instructed participants to shock a learner by
pressing a lever on a machine each time the learner made a mistake on a word-matching
task.  If learners continued to make mistakes, the test subjects were told to increase the
intensity of the shocks by 15-volt increments.  The shock intensity started at 15 volts and,
if enough errors were made, could reach 450 volts.

Milgram found that an average and presumably normal
group of participants would willingly inflict very painful
and perhaps even harmful electric shocks on innocent
victims.

In actuality, the shock machine was non-functional and the learner was an actor who did
not actually get shocked.  The experiment revealed that a majority of the participants
continued to obey the lead experimenter, delivering shocks up to 450 volts, simply
because the experimenter commanded them to.

Although participants were told about the deception upon completing the experiment,
many found the experience to be very real and gripping.  Later that year, the headline of
an article in the October 26 issue of The New York Times proclaimed, "Sixty-five Percent
in Test Blindly Obey Order to Inflict Pain."  This article instigated much discussion about
the ordeal Milgram put his subjects through and began the enduring discussion of the
ethics of such experimentation.

Milgram’s experiments (he conducted over 20 variations of the experiment) have had
long-lasting significance in that they demonstrated clearly that normal individuals could
be induced to act destructively, even in the absence of physical coercion.  People do not
need to be innately evil or aberrant to act in ways that are reprehensible and inhumane.
Many scientists suspect this is what happened in WWII when millions of Jewish people
were tortured.

Related Studies
Professionals in many fields (such as nursing, marketing, accounting) have performed
similar tests to determine the extent to which people will comply with requests that seem
unethical.  For example, Steven Hartwell, a law professor at the University of San Diego,
conducted an experiment whereby his students were to advise a client individually in a
small-claims court.

Hartwell writes:
The "clients" were, in fact, a single confederate who sought the same advice from each
student:  how she should present her side of a rent dispute.  I told each student to advise
the client to lie under oath that she had paid the rent.  When students asked for
clarification, I uniformly responded, "...My advice is that, if your client wants to win her
case, then you must tell her to perjure herself.” ...We wanted them to experience the pull
between loyalty to authority... and prescribed ethical conduct .... Although many of the 24
participating students grumbled either to me or to the client about my proffered advice,
23 told their client to perjure herself.

Lesson Learned
Even without Milgram’s obedience studies, psychologists knew that people have a
tendency to obey orders.  The surprising part of his experiments was learning about the
strength of the tendency.  Because of the knowledge gained, we can try to guard against
following such unethical commands.  The U.S. Army has taken these studies seriously
and all officers are required to enroll in two psychology courses at the Military Academy.
In 1985, the head of the academy's department of behavioural sciences and leadership
wrote, "One of the desired outcomes of this is that our future military leaders will be fully
cognizant not only of their authority but also of their responsibility to make decisions that
are well considered and morally sound."
