Case Study 12
The Zimbardo Prison Experiment

Philip Zimbardo was a tenured professor of psychology at Standford University when he
conducted his now famous Standford Prison Experiment.  In this experiment, 24 normal
(as well as intelligent and moral) college students were randomly assigned to be
"prisoners" or "guards" in a mock prison located in the basement of the psychology
building at the university.  The year was 1971.

In a relatively short period of time, the participants began quickly acting out their roles,
with the guards becoming sadistic and the prisoners becoming passive and depressed.
The experiment was originally planned to last two weeks but it was terminated after six
days when a grad student, Christina Maslach, watching the experiment live (via video)
from Zimbardo’s office, became alarmed.  (Christina, his then girlfriend, later married
Zimbardo).

At the start of the experiment the “prisoners” were actually arrested
by Palo Alto police and dropped off at the Standford “jail”.  They
were then strip searched, sprayed for lice, and locked up with chains
around their ankles.  The “guards” were given authority to dictate 24-
hour-a-day rules for the prisoners and were soon humiliating them in
an effort to “break their will.”

What became evident as days passed was that the young men who played prisoners and
guards revealed how specific circumstances can distort individual personalities.  It
appears that anyone, when given complete control over another, can act like a monster.
"In a few days, the role dominated the person," Zimbardo recalled.  "They became guards
and prisoners."  So disturbing was the transformation that Zimbardo agreed to end the
experiment abruptly.

In contemporary society, this experiment would not be permitted.  Zimbardo maintains,
however, the participants suffered no long-term harm but admits that some had symptoms
of mental breakdown during the experiment.

Related Incidences
Some psychologists compare the prisoner and guard transformations in Zimbardo’s
experiment to what happened to American soldiers when they abused prisoners from Abu
Ghraib.  Photographs released to the press showed previously average “churchgoing”
people inflicting horrid abuse on Iraqi soldiers.  More information on this scandal can be
found by performing an Internet search with the key words “Abu Ghraib.”
