Practice Project Instructions
When engaged in conversation, do men and women move their hands similar amounts?  Expanding on the research interests of Kimura, you will observe people and determine the answer.
Before you can perform the experiment you must make a hypothesis, define your variables, create a list of materials and obtain them, write and follow a procedure, then collect data based on your observations.  Only after these tasks have been completed can you prepare your lab report.
Experiments often stem from questions researchers are curious about.  The question this practice experiment relates to may be as simple as "Do hand movements differ in men and women during conversation?"  One hypothesis might be that men move their hands more than women or that women move their hands more than men.  One might even hypothesize that there is no significant difference in hand movements.  What would you choose for a hypothesis?
You must create a list of materials.  Based on the information that follows (next page), you will need paper and pencil to record your observations, a watch or timing device, and people to observe!
Note:  Although the information below forms the basis of the procedure you will follow when completing the experiment, you must write the instructions in step-by-step fashion.
First, make a table to record your data.  You may create one large table to record data for all subjects or you could create individual tables for each subject.  An example of the second option is presented below.
Person One - Male
Left Hand
Right Hand
Both Hands
Self-Touching
Free Movement
Note: Definitions of the movement categories are provided on the next page.
Second, find someone you can watch for five minutes.  This person must be engaged in conversation with someone other than you.  The subjects could be in a restaurant, on a bus, in a park, or at a wedding for example.  You do not need to know the subject.  As the subject speaks, you will record his or her hand movements.
Each time a subject moves his or her hand, you will place a tick-mark in the appropriate cell in the table.  Please note that you must differentiate between right-hand movements, left-hand movements, and movements involving both hands at the same time.  In some instances, watching a home movie of a family gathering is ideal because you can replay the tape or DVD many times to count movements correctly.
The sample size for the purposes of this exercise is small.  You are to collect data on only four males over the age of 12 and four females over the age of 12.  However, you may observe more people; this will increase the validity of your results.  Researchers like Kimura observe hundreds of people in this type of study.
Defining terms is an important task to complete before you begin your observations.  Any definition should be placed in the procedure section of the lab report.  For this experiment, you need to define self-touching and free movement.   Self-touching, for example, needs to be clearly defined before you can determine which column a tick-mark should be placed.  Scratching an arm, twisting a strand of hair, or brushing a twig off a pant leg are all considered self-touching movements.  If a subject waves a hand in the air, taps a finger on a table, or points to an object, the tic-mark should go in the free movement cell.
Next, determine what the manipulated and responding and controlled variables are and include them in your report.  If you require assistance in determining these variables, please contact your teacher.
After you collect your data you must organize it in a summary table and create a set of graphs to display the data.
In the Analysis and Conclusion section of your report, you will summarize the results.  You will confirm or refute your hypothesis.  You may wish to comment on right-hand movements compared to left-hand movements.  Did one gender motion with one hand more than the other gender?
If the practice experiment was a real experiment, you would conduct background research on the topic.  You might learn about which side of the brain controls movement of the right hand and of the left hand.
At the end of the report you are to provide two possible sources of error.  A Reference section is not required.  For the complete list of the sections of the lab report you will require, please page forward!
