ANSWER KEY
Experimental Psychology 30 - Assignment 4
Module 2 Section 3 and 4
/34
Part One:  Multiple-Choice Questions(7 marks)
LetterStatement
B
1.Infomercials often use _____ to sell products.
A.the placebo effect
B.statistical illusions
C.re-interpretation bias
D.regression to the mean
D
2. When the behaviour of people changes simply because they are being observed, the
phenomenon is termed the _____ effect.
A.bias
B.confounding
C.observer
D.Hawthorne
D
3. Inattentional blindness can cause someone to miss something that is right before
their eyes, and this can alter the interpretation of results in psychological research.
This was demonstrated in the video about selective attention when many participants
did not see the _____.
A.
umbrella
B.
people in black
C.
chimpanzee
D.
gorilla
Use the information on Magnets and Pain Relief to answer multiple-choice questions 4 to 7.

ANSWER KEY
B
4.
According to the course information, magnets havebeen used to reduce
A.
stomach aches
B.
joint pain
C.
constipation
D.
memory loss
A
5.    Consumers can purchase many items with magnetic properties.  According to the
course information, which of the following is NOT an item containing magnets?
A.Underwear
B.Dog collars
C.Personal massagers
D.In-soles
D
6.Dr. Weintraub used 375 participants in his magnetismstudy.  The number of
participants was important because
A.it showed how important pain management is
B.the results would exclude variables
C.it showed how many people believe in magnetism
D.the results would be statistically significant
A
7.A major problem with Dr. Weintraub’s studyrelates to the fact that
participants were able to determine if they received the magnetic insole or
the placebo.  This means these participants were not
A.blinded
B.randomized
C.informed
D.effected
Part Two:  Written-Response Questions(12 marks)
1.What is the importance of randomization when assigning participants to the experimental
and control groups?(2 marks)
As much as we would like to, we cannot trust the direct personal experiences of
people.  Confounding factors are partly responsible for this lack of trust because
confounding factors can create the illusion that ineffective treatment is actually

ANSWER KEY
effective. It ensures that neither the researchers nor the participants know who is given
the real treatment and who is given the fake treatment or placebo.
2.What is the difference between a single-blind experiment and a double-blind
experiment?(2 marks)
3.List the 8 confounding factors discussed in the course information and provide a brief
description of how each confounding factor can affect research results(8 marks)
Confounding FactorEffect on Research Results
The Placebo EffectThe placebo effect, in essence, is a
measurable, observable, or perceived
improvement in health (physical or
psychological) that is not attributable to the
treatment.
The Re-interpretation Effectmore of a perceptual illusion than a real
benefit.  For example, even when a treatment
does not improve symptoms, people may
re-interpret their symptoms and experience
them as less severe.

ANSWER KEY
Observer BiasAlso known as confirmation bias, observer
bias really refers to "selective noticing"
whereby researchers tend to notice and to
look for what confirms their beliefs and to
ignore or overlook the relevance of what
contradicts their belief systems.
Selection BiasIf researchers were allowed to choose who
receives the legitimate treatment and who
receives the placebo, a significant risk would
occur that the researchers would
subconsciously choose people in such a
manner that the outcome of the experiment
would be more favourable.
Statistical illusionsrelates to observational studies in which
correlation is often confused with causation.
The Hawthorne Effectregardless of what condition is changed (or if
it was changed at all) people will alter their
behaviours simply because they are being
observed. People singled out for a study of
any kind may improve their performance or
behaviour, not because of any specific
condition being tested, but simply because of
the attention they receive.
Experimenter’s Biasthere is a risk that participants will be
influenced by the interaction with
researchers, not just with the manipulated
variable. The outcome of an experiment
tends to be biased towards the result
expected or desired by the researchers.
Inattentional BlindnessPeople tend to focus their attention on things
they find interesting or important.  It is easy,
too, to focus too narrowly or on only the
negative aspect of events.  When our focus is
skewed in this way, we do not get the entire
"picture" and our complete understanding of
events and situations is compromised.
Part Three: Psychological Research Proposals(15 marks)

ANSWER KEY
1.Consider the following question:Does listening to music while studying help
students to perform better in exams?
Would this problem be suitable for conducting psychological research? What
criteria did you use to make your decision?(3 marks)
Yes, this question would be suitable for psychological research because it focuses on
human behaviour, specifically the effect of listening to music while studying on exam
performance.
2.
Provide 4 reasons why it is important for researchersto prepare research
proposals?(4 marks)
●to outline the research questions
●to summarize the selected research topic
●to present ways that would be best in conducting the study
●to justify doing the study
3. Using the Topic of Interest Question Checklist, determine if using music to improve
performance on exams would be a suitable topic for you.
(8 marks)
*remember to provide a statement that indicates whether the topic is suitable for
you.  You must show evidence of working through the checklist to receive full marks.
-Students must demonstrate that they have worked through the Topic of Interest
Question Checklist. (7 marks)
-Provide a statement that indicates whether the topic is suitable for them (1 mark)
---------------------------------- End of Assignment 4 ----------------------------------
When you have completed your assignment, upload this document to the Assignment 4
dropbox on Brightspace.
