Approval ProcessThe Canadian process for the approval of new medications often takes longer than the American process.  Because Canadians often benefit from American drugs, the quote and table below (both from the Merck Manual), provide a general timeline for FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approval for a new food or drug.
"If the FDA approves, a drug will become available for treatment of patients.  The whole process usually takes about 10 years.  On average, only about 5 of 4,000 drugs studied in the laboratory are studied in people, and only about 1 of 5 drugs studied in people is approved and makes it to the medicine cabinet."
Steps to FDA Approval
Phase
 Test Group
 Purpose
 Length
Preclinical testing
Laboratory settings (such as cell cultures and animals)
To determine the chemical and physical characteristics of the drug and to assess the safety and effects of the drug in living organisms
2 - 6.5 years
Clinical studies
Phase I
10 - 100 healthy volunteers
To establish basic safety and blood levels achieved with different doses of the drug
1.5 years
Phase II
50 - 500 people who have the disorder being studied
To establish the drug's effectiveness and dosage range, to determine drug kinetics, and to identify side effects
2 years
Phase III
300 - 30,000 people who have the disorder being studied
To confirm the most effective dosage regimen and to obtain more information about the drug's effectiveness and side effects
3.5 years
FDA review
All information from preclinical and clinical studies
To determine whether the drug has been proved to be effective and safe
0.5 - 1 year
As indicated by the table, animals are often used in the initial stages of testing drugs and procedures.  Sometimes animals (mice and rats for example) are given cancer and cancer drugs are tested.  Sometimes animals (such as cats and dogs) are intentionally crippled so that researchers can study the effect of electric stimulation on muscle movement.
Throughout history, humans have performed experiments ranging from minimally invasive to exceptionally cruel.  With respect to current practice, how do scientists determine what is acceptable?  To date, guidelines apply to using animals in experimentation, but no explicit rules are set.
