Basic Page
Step 3: Defining the Variables
Every experiment requires clearly defined variables.  Variables are categorized into three types (as you have learned previously in this module).Most experiments have only one manipulated variable and one or two responding variables.  All other variables are controlled.  In our example of satiation and response time, the variables that are controlled are many.  To rule out differences in response time that may be attributable to gender, physical health, and age, all test subjects should be of the same gender, the same age, and in the same relative health.  Controlling these variables are important because someone might claim that a 30 year-old person naturally has a shorter response time than an 80 year-old person regardless of satiation level.Variables such as alertness of the driver, temperature of the vehicle, and the comfort of the seat must also be controlled.  If one participant is driving in a very cold car while another is driving at a normal (comfortable) temperature, no one can tell that the cold was not the factor affecting response time.  As much as possible, all other variables apart from the manipulated variable must be held constant in an experiment.
Practice Question
Cindy is a grade four student and her science class has been asked to find out if compost mulch affects plant growth.  With her lab partner, Cindy designs an experiment to answer the question.Possible hypotheses include the following:1.    If plants are given compost mulch, then they will grow bigger and be healthier than plants grown without compost mulch.2.    If plants are given compost mulch, then they will not be as big or as healthy as plants grown without compost mulch.3.    If plants are given compost mulch, then there will be no significantly affect the growth or health of plants.Regardless of the hypothesis made the manipulated variable is the compost and the responding variable is plant growth.Controlled variables include using the same...1.    type, health, and size of plants used at the start of the experiment2.    soil3.    size of container4.    amount of light each day5.    amount and temperature of water given at each watering cycle  This is a simple biological science experiment.  Psychological experiments are usually more complicated.  Samples of psychological experiments are explored in subsequent sections.
