In this section you will learn about
* the various measures of central tendency

* the main measures of variability

* validity and reliability
After collecting a set of numerical data (or data that can be converted to numerical values),
researchers often calculate averages to help them interpret information and predict events.
Basic statistical concepts such as the mean, mode, and median are the most common
measures of central tendency used by researchers. Central tendency refers to how
clustered a group of numbers is.  Mathematically, central tendency refers to the average in
a set of data.
In addition to researchers, many other individuals use measures of central tendency in
various aspects of their jobs.  For example, teachers calculate averages (report card
marks), meteorologists make weather comparisons (current temperature to average value),
and coaches determine who to place on the opening roster (batting averages).
One of the top three reasons people watch the news is the weather report.  To illustrate the
main measures of central tendency, consider an analysis of the weather for 11 consecutive
days in May, specifically, the temperature values for a small town in Northern Alberta in the
table below.
central tendency:  a measure of mathematical averages such as mean, mode, and median

The mode is the number that occurs most often in aset of data.  To determine the mode, you should
first organize the numbers in order of size.  Using our temperature values from the previous page, the
new order would be as follows:
This number occurs three times.
The median is the number in the middle of the set of data after you arrange the numbers in order of size.
In many cases, you will have the same number of values on the left and right of the median value.  If,
however, there is an even number of data points, you will have two numbers as your median and the
values must be averaged.  In our case, we have 11 data points.  The median is data point six.
There are five data points to the left and five data points to the right of the median.
The mean is the value obtained when you add all the values in a data set and then divide the sum (total)
by the number of values in the data set.  In our case, there are 11 values.
mode:  the number that occurs most often in a set of data
median:  the number in the middle of an ordered set of data
mean:  the value obtained by dividing the sum of all values by the total number of values

To answer some of the questions in Assignment Three, you must access the LearnAlberta.ca website (
http://learnalberta.ca/) and complete several exercises.  Content on LearnAlberta.ca, while created for
all Albertans, is accessible only with a username and password.  Passwords and usernames change every
year.  If you have forgotten the password for this year, please contact your teacher, marker, or school. *
*Your username and password may automatically be entered for you, once you enter the link.
Please read the following instructions in their entirety B E F O R E entering the LearnAlberta.ca website
and completing the exercises.
Step One:
Step Two:

Step Three:
Step Four:

As you complete the first three topics in the Central Tendencies Exercise, record in your notebook the
values for mean, mode, and median for each of the following:
* hockey example (goals)
* curling example (final scores)
* Math 14 test example with 5 tests
* Math 14 text example with 6 tests
You need these values in Assignment 3.

While terms of central tendency refer to how clustered (central) a group of numbers is, measures of
variability refer to how spread out a set of numbers is.  The terms variability, distribution, and dispersion
are synonyms and refer to the spread of a data set.  The most commonly used measures of variability (or
spread) are the range, percentile, interquartile range, variance, and standard deviation.
The least complicated measure of variability is the range.  The range is the difference between the
highest value in a data set and the lowest value in a data set.
To understand interquartile range one must first understand percentiles.  A percentile is not the same as
a percentage.  If Lance scored 32 of a possible 50 marks on a test for introversion, his percentage score
would be 64%.  To determine the percentage, you divide 32 by 50 then multiply the quotient by 100.  If
Lance wanted to compare his score to the scores of others on the same test, he would use his percentile.
If 70 percent of the other scores were less than Lance's score (less than 32 out of 50) then Lance's score
would be the 70th percentile.  To summarize, percentiles compare your score to the scores of others
who have taken the same test.
In any set of data, the total number of percentiles is 100.  Researchers may divide the total number of
percentiles into 10 equal parts called deciles, or they can divide the total number of percentiles into four
equal parts called quartiles.  If a person's score was in the first decile, he or she would have scored less
than 90% of others on the same test.  If a person scored in the fourth quartile, he or she scored higher
than 75% of the population who took the test.  The median of all percentiles is the 50th percentile.  The
difference between the first quartile (the 25th percentile) and the third quartile (the 75th percentile) is
the interquartile range.  This range contains the middle 50% of the scores in a distribution.
range:  the difference between the highest value andthe lowest value in a data set
percentile:  a value on a scale of 100 that indicatesthe percent of a distribution that is equal to or below
it
decile:  any one of nine numbers that divide a distributioninto 10 parts such that each part contains the
same number of scores
quartile:  any of the three values that divide a distributioninto four parts with each part containing one
fourth of the total population

A group of high school Biology students were asked to identify correctly 14 different kinds of perennial
flowers.  Below is a chart of scores showing how well each student did on the test.
Q: What is Ted's percent?
A: Divide 7 by 14 then multiply the quotient by 100.
Ted’s percent is 50%
Q: What is Ted's percentile?
A: To begin, reorder the scores from lowest to highest.
Ted ranks in eighth position (from the lowest mark) in the class of 10.  Because the number of percentiles
in any given data set is 100, we must multiply 10 (the number of scores) by another factor to equal 100.
In this case, we multiply 10 by 10 to get 100.  This means we simply multiply Ted's rank of 8 by 10 to get
his percentile.
Ted's percentile is 80.
Q: What is Sam's percentile?
A:  Sam's percentile is 90.
Sam's percentile means that 10% of people scored higher on the test than he did and 90% of people
scored lower on the test than he did.
In some studies, researchers want to know how close each individual score is to the middle of the
distribution.  Using the mean as the measure of the middle of a distribution, researchers calculate the

average squared difference of the scores from the mean.  The result of this calculation is called
the variance.  The variance is used to determine thestandard deviation.  The standard deviation is the
square root of the variance.
Wow... that sounds complicated!
Don't worry, you won't be required to perform these types of calculations in the final exam (or project).
However, be familiar with the terms mean, mode, median, range, variance, and standard deviation.
A simple example of how to calculate variance and standard deviation involves a dart game.  Six friends
each throw one dart at a dart board much like the one in the photo above.  Three of the six friends get a
"bulls-eye" (dead centre) worth 10 points.  Of the other three friends, one lands his dart in the first ring
closest the centre and earns 9 points.  The second friend lands her dart in the third ring closest the
centre and earns 7 points.  The last friend lands his dart in the fifth ring closest to the centre and earns 5
points.

Q: What is the standard deviation in the dart game?
Step One:  Determine the arithmetic average or mean fromthe data set by adding all six values and
dividing the sum by six.
Step Two:  Calculate the difference between each scoreand the mean value, and then square that
difference.

Step Three:  Determine the arithmetic average or mean ofall the squared differences by adding all six
calculated values together and dividing the sum by six.  This mean is also known as the variance.
Step Four: Determine the standard deviation by findingthe square root of the variance.

If the value of standard deviation is small, the numbers in a data set are clustered closely together.  If a
standard deviation is large, then the numbers are more spread out.  Graphically, this can be represented
as follows:
As you know, all psychologists study behaviour.  Many psychologists want to determine what is "normal"
behaviour for a given population.  In psychology, a simple definition of a statistical
deviation (from normal) could be stated as a noticeabledeparture from those traits or behaviours
possessed by the majority of people.
If we use adult height as an example, a noticeable departure from the average or norm would be a
seven-foot tall individual (2.13 metres) or a four-foot tall individual (1.22 metres).  Because the heights of
the majority of adults are less extreme than either of these two examples, we can say that the two
heights (seven feet and four feet) are abnormal.
To restate this idea, individuals with characteristics and behaviours that are not within an average range
(characteristics falling beyond a particular distance from the average value) can sometimes be
considered abnormal.  To continue with our height example, we can use 5 feet 10 inches as the
mathematical average (mean) height of Canadian men.  Many men are either taller than 5 feet 10 inches
or shorter than 5 feet 10 inches but are not considered abnormal with respect to height.  Scientists can
statistically show "abnormal" by collecting data, calculating the average, determining the standard
deviation, and then finding all individuals that are farther than two standard deviations away from the
average.  The individuals farther than two standard deviations from the average generally make up about
5% of the sample population.  This can be graphically displayed in a distribution curve also known as
a bell curve or a normal distribution .
Bell Curve of Height in a Population of Canadian Men

As shown in the figure above, the x-axis representsheight and the y-axis represents the number of men
sampled.  The blue area on the left and the red areaon the right represent those men are either
abnormally short or abnormally tall.  These individuals fall more than two standard deviations from the
average height or mean score.  The area under the graph between the red and blue sections represents
those men who are of "normal" height.
statistical deviation:  a significant departure fromthose traits or behaviours possessed by the majority of
people
I f the entire population of Alberta completed an IQ test, the scores would fall into a bell-shaped curve
around the mean of 100.  More than two-thirds of the population would score between 85 and 115.
About 5% of the population would score less than 70 or more than 130.  IQ scores below 55 and above
145 are very rare.
On the diagram below, the x-axis reflects IQ scoresand the y-axis is the number of people who
completed the test.

Although the statistical method of determining abnormality (characteristics or behaviour falling outside
the "norm") is scientific and valid, it does nothing to address certain important issues such as health and
welfare.  For example, in the past two decades the bell curve for weight (mass) in North America has
shifted right (with mass on the x-axis).  This meansthat we, as a society, are on average becoming
heavier.  This may be the norm, but is it healthy?  Is it a good thing?
Scientists must have a common understanding or definition of scientific concepts and processes so that
communication is effective and misunderstandings are reduced.  For example, scientists from many
countries know that on the periodic table the symbol K representsthe metal potassium although they
may not have the same word associated with the symbol.  Below are the flags of five countries and the
words they use to describe the element represented by the letter K.  Can you correctly identify each
nationality?  Mouse-over the flags for the to see if you guessed correctly.

Having a common language and common understanding of important concepts is vital to accurate
communication.  A chemist in the Ukraine might not understand what l'eau, Wasser, and el agua mean
(the French, German, and Spanish words for "water"), but he or she would know that H 2 O
(l)
 represents
that wonderful liquid!
Interesting Fact:  Many elements on the periodic table have Latin names.  The Latin name for potassium
is kalium and that is why that element has the symbolK!
For more information about the periodic table, go tohttp://www.periodni.com/en/
Just as rock climbers expect their ropes and carabiners will reliably bear their masses as they climb
upwards and rappel down, researchers in all sciences, not just psychology, want their experiments to be
reliable so that others may repeat their experiments and obtain similar results.  When experiments are
reliable and valid, conclusions reached can be transferred to similar situations in other parts of the
world.

Specifically, reliability is the extent to which an experiment, test, or measuring procedure yields the
same results on repeated trials.  Reliability can be divided into three categories: test-retest, internal, and
inter-rater.  The first category, test-retest reliability,requires that the psychologist obtain similar results
with the same test or measurement at two different points in time.  With internal reliability, various
parts of a test or measurement must produce similar results.  In the last category, inter-rater reliability,
two or more psychologists (or "raters"), must come to similar conclusions regarding a measurement,
test, or experiment.
Experiments, tests, and measurements must also be valid.  Validity refers to the degree to which a
technique or test measures what it is designed to measure.  Validity can be divided into five categories,
the first of which is face validity.  As the category implies, face validity refers to a test or technique
appearing to measure what it is supposed to measure.  With content validity, the test or technique used
should actually measure the content or areas that are most important.  The test or technique used may
not measure everything, and it does not have to -- as long as it measures the major areas of concern.
The third category, concurrent validity requires thatsimilar tests or experiments yield the same results.
For example, two different I.Q. tests taken by the same individual should yield similar results.  As the
name suggests, predictivevalidity refers to how wellbehaviour can be predicted.  For example, different
patients with the same diagnosis are predicted to respond the same way to the same treatment.  The
last category of validity, construct validity, requiresthat a test measures what it is designed to measure.
For example, if a test is designed to measure musical ability, but instead it measures verbal reasoning, it
cannot be considered a valid test.
reliability:  the extent to which an experiment, test,or measuring procedure yeilds the same results on
repeated trials

test-retest reliability:  similar results are obtained from the same test at two different points in time
internal reliability:  different parts of a test producesimilar results
inter-rater reliability:  two or more psychologistsreach similar conclusions using the same test

validity:  a test measures what it is designed tomeasure
face validity:  a test appearing to measure what itis supposed to measure
content validity:  a test measuring the most importantcontent
concurrent validity:  similar tests yield similarresults
predictive validity:  the ability to predict behaviourbased on test results
construct validity:  a test measures what it is designedto measure
