Basic Page
Step 5: Procedure (Conducting the Experiment)
When a researcher has a good question, a workable hypothesis, and a list of materials, he or she can begin to plan a procedure for conducting the experiment.  The procedure is often written in point form or in steps.  Each step details what the researcher and participants must do.  The steps must be clear enough and detailed enough to allow another person to perform the experiment.  Think of procedures as recipes.  Just as a qualified cook should be able to duplicate a recipe found in a cook book, a trained experimenter should be able to replicate an experiment by following the procedure.
Please review the following example of a procedure for the driving experiment mentioned previously.
Procedure:
1.    Divide the test subjects into two groups of 20 individuals each:  Group A and Group B.2.    Have Group A participants eat sandwiches until they feel comfortably full.  Group A is the Experimental Group.  Participants in Group B do not eat.  Group B is the Control Group.3.    Have participants from Group A begin the simulation.  As various road hazards appear (e.g., potholes, wild animals, fallen trees), the system records the time lapse between the presentation of the hazard and the activation of the driver response (e.g., applying the brake, stepping on the accelerator, turning the steering wheel).  The computer simulator records the response times.4.    Have participants from Group B complete the same simulation as Group A.5.    Record the data (time of response) for each group of participants.6.    Repeat steps 1 through 5 two more times.  (Each repetition of the experiment is called a run or trial.  Be sure that each trial is appropriately labelled so results can be reviewed separately and then compared with each other.) Note:  Temperature, lighting, and noise level must be set to comfortable norms and must remain constant between groups and throughout the trial.
Q:  Why perform more than one trial or run in an experiment?
A:  Researchers need to be sure the results of an experiment are not a fluke or an accident.  The results of each trial should be consistent.  If one trial results in data that is inconsistent with the other trials, then the experiment may need to be modified or more trials may need to be conducted.
Q: What is the importance of the Control Group and Experimental Group?
A:  Good experiments compare different groups of trials with each other.   This comparison helps ensure that the changes observed are caused by the independent variable.  The two groups in such experiments are the control group and the experimental group.  All trials where the manipulated variable is changed belong in the experimental group.In our example, the group that ate sandwiches before they began the simulation is the experimental group.  This is Group A in the experiment. The participants who did not eat sandwiches before the simulation began belong in the control group.  This is Group B in the experiment.  The results from Group A will be compared to Group B in Step Seven (Analysis).  Please note that some experiments may not have a control group but, instead, have different versions of the experimental groups.  These types of experiments are discussed in subsequent sections of this course.
Q: Sample Size - Why use 40 test subjects?
A:  More than one test subject is used for much the same reason more than one trial is performed.  Scientists want results that are not considered flukes or anomalies.  The sample size must be large enough to rule out such extremes or abnormalities in individuals.  The sample size cannot be too large, however, because issues of cost and feasibility arise.  Many websites can help researchers determine the appropriate sample size for their experiments.  When developing your procedure, please discuss sample size with your teacher.
When developing the procedures, you might want to refer to the checklist below and you will want to answer "yes" to all the questions.
Procedure Checklist
control group:  the group of individuals who do not receive the manipulated variableexperimental group:  the group of individuals who receive the manipulated variable
(this link opens in a new window/tab)
