KEY
Experimental Psychology 30 - Assignment 1(29 Marks)
Part One:  Multiple-Choice Questions(9 marks)
LetterStatement
Use the following information to answer multiple-choice questions 1 and 2.
Correlation
A study was conducted on a group of second grade children.  Researchers tested the
students’ aptitudes in reading comprehension and math problem-solving skills.  The
researchers found a correlation value (r) of +0.86.
D
1.What is the strength of the relationship?
A.Weak
B.  Moderate
C.  Moderately strong
D.  Very strong
C
2.   The r value means that
A.  reading comprehension causes high scores in math
B.  high scores in math cause students to comprehend what they read
C.  reading comprehension and math scores are positively correlated
D.  reading comprehension and math scores are negatively correlated
B
3.   Lance is having trouble deciding what to order from the menu at the new
restaurant he is patronizing.  He walks slowly to the restroom while glancing at
what other patrons are eating.  By the time he returns, he has decided what he
will order.  This is an example of:
A.  monkey see, monkey do theory
B.  social proof

KEY
C.  evaluation therapy
D.  confirmation method
C
4.   This psychologist was the first person to formally establish a psychology
laboratory.
A.  Fechner
B.  Leibzig
C.  Wundt
D.  Freud
D
5.   In the case study example, Jimmy was diagnosed with _____ because of
alcohol abuse.
A.  Alzheimer’s disease
B.  post-traumatic stress disorder
C.  general psychosis
D.  advanced organic brain syndrome
C
6.   In the experimental research example, test subjects who heard the words
“smashed into” recalled broken glass viewed in the video approximately ____
as often as test subjects who heard the word “hit.”
A.  one quarter
B.  half
C.  twice
D.  equally
B
7.   In Case Study One (The Bystander Effect), the experiment showed that if
the victim was in the presence of one bystander, the victim had an 85% chance
of receiving help compared to _____ if two or more bystanders were present.
A.  21%
B.  31%
C.  41%
D.  51%
C
8.   Regardless of the branch of psychology a person is interested in, all
psychologists study
A.  motivation
B.  thinking
C.  behaviour
D.  feelings

KEY
D
9.   Experimental psychology is distinct from other branches of psychology
because researchers seek to conduct investigations
A.  in natural environments
B.  outside a laboratory
C.  using random-chance
D.  in controlled conditions
Part Two:  Written-Response Questions(8 marks)
1.Correlation cannot imply causation.  Explain the meaning of this statement.(2 marks)
Correlation cannot imply causation due to correlational studies being limited to only
proving a statistical relationship between two variables, we are unable to discover
causation, only ever speculate it.
2.Review the Correlation Example (Risk Factors for Substance Abuse) from the Readings
Booklet.  If students have poor academic performance, how concerned should their
parents be regarding potential substance abuse?  Explain.(3 marks)
Using the correlation example, parents should not be worried about substance abuse
risks, as there is limited correlation data to suggest that students with poor grades will
have a future with substance abuse. This is simply statistical correlational data,
parents should always be ready if their child does go through something seemingly “no
one” goes through.
3.How we view the world influences what we choose to observe and our interpretation of
that observed behaviour.  Psychologists need to be aware of this as they evaluate
behaviour.  Review the various perspectives that a person may use.  Which view is most
closely related to the way you interpret behaviour?  Explain.(3 marks)
awv. Students should select any of the following in their response.
biological perspective:  focuses on how the brain is linked to behaviour
cognitive perspective: focuses on how the mind deals with information
psychoanalytic perspective: belief that human behaviour is the result of unconscious
desires
humanistic perspective:  view of behaviour that assumes people create their own
meaning in life

KEY
eclectic view: selection of what appears to be best in various doctrines, methods,
styles, or views
Part Three:  Student Select!(12 marks)
1.Choose one of the followingResponse Optionsbelowthen choose aResearch
Methodology.In your response, describe/illustratethe strengths and limitations of the
research methodology you have chosen.
Response Options
□
PowerPoint  (Please upload it as a second attachmentin the Dropbox.)
□
Poster  (Scan, fax, or mail a paper posterorcreatean online poster.)
□
Story.
□
Poem.
□
Other  (contact your teacher to check if your optionwill work for this response)
Research Methodologies
□
Naturalistic Observation
□
Case Study
□
Survey
□
Correlational Research
Marking Guide:
Strengths – 4 marks

KEY
Limitations – 4 marks
Communication/Creativity in Response – 4 marks
When you have completed your assignment, upload this document and your Part Three
response to the Assignment 1 dropbox on Brightspace.
