26Volume 30, Issue 4SKEPTICAL INQUIRER
Magnet Therapy
A Billion-dollar Boondoggle
About a billion dollars a year is now spent on “magnet therapy,” which is claimed to
eliminate many symptoms and diseases. Basic scientific principles indicate that all
of this money is wasted.
BRUCE L. FLAMM
Gerald Fried
SI J-A 2006 pgs  5/30/06  1:41 PM  Page 26

SKEPTICAL INQUIRERJuly / August 200627
A
bout a year ago Leonard Finegold at Drexel University
and  I  decided  to  look  into  the  controversial  field  (no
pun intended) of “magnet therapy.” As a physics pro-
fessor, Finegold knows a bit about magnets and magnetic fields. As
a physician and former research chairman, I know a bit about ther-
apy and medical research. Perhaps a physicist and a physician could
shed some light on this interesting topic. We knew that magnets
were  touted  as  a  treatment  for  many  medical  conditions  and  we
knew that they were popular. But we were both quite surprised to
learn just how popular they are. In the U.S.A., their annual sales
are  estimated  at  $300  million  (Brody  2000),  and  globally  more
than a billion dollars (Weintraub 1999). You can get a rough idea
of  the  magnitude  of  the  magnet  healing  industry  by  doing  a
Google search for magnet healing. A search in January 2006 yielded
459,000  Web  pages,  many  of  them  claiming  that  magnets  have
almost miraculous healing power. Do they? Professor Finegold and
I reviewed the literature on magnet therapy and found very little
supporting  evidence.  An  abbreviated  version  of  our  review  was
recently  published  in  the British  Medical  Journal(Finegold  and
Flamm  2006). What  follows  are  a  few  comments  on  the  magnet
healing industry, a brief synopsis of our BMJpaper, and a look at
magnet therapy from a theoretical point of view.
Magnet Therapy Is Big Business
If you try the Internet searching experiment described above you
will notice that in addition to almost half a million pages dealing
with  magnet  therapy,  Google  automatically  provides  a  list  of
“sponsored links.” Your computer screen will fill with the names
of companies that have paid to help you find their site. What do
these  sites  offer?  If  you  click  on  www.magnetsandhealth.com,
you will learn that “magnets help to flush out toxins in our body”
and that “our magnet products have both beauty and health ben-
efits, they increase blood flow and they increase the oxygen level
in the body.” Really? They also point out that their magnets are
small and mobile, which “allows you to heal the ailments of your-
self and your family without having major interruptions in your
life and routine. You also get all the benefits without having to go
for expensive sessions with a magnetic therapist or having to take
expensive  courses  of  drugs  which  can  also  have  harmful  side
effects.” The message seems quite clear: Why bother with doctors
and medicines when magnets are safe and effective?
Another  of  the  scores  of  sponsored  links  is  www.magnetic-
therapymagnets.com. This site is interesting because, in addition
to selling dozens of magnetic healing devices for humans, it doesn’t
forget about Fido. For only $11.95 plus shipping they will send
you an amazing pet collar that will “keep your cat or dog in excel-
lent health and vitality with constant magnetic therapy.” My wife
and I are now kicking ourselves for spending thousands of dol-
lars on veterinary care over the past several years. If we had only
bought that collar!
I  don’t  mean  to  pick  on  these  two  companies  or  imply  that
their  claims  are  any  more  outrageous  than  any  others.  In  fact,
there are now hundreds of companies selling similar devices and
making similar claims.
Among  the  companies  touting  magnet  therapy  I  was  sur-
prised  to  find  the  Sharper  Image,  a  seemingly  reputable  outfit.
They offer a device called a “Dual-Head Personal Massager with
Magnetic Therapy.” It is somewhat phallus-shaped, small enough
to  fit  in  a  purse,  and  claims  to  be  a  “discreet  personal  massager
with  two  independent  vibrating  heads.”  That  certainly  seems
enticing enough, but they insist that it does far more that your
average vibrator. “A smaller pinpoint node enhances its massage
with magnetic therapy for focused treatment.” Hmm . . . magnet
therapy for focused treatment.
Some  companies  actually  claim  that  their  magnets  prevent,
reverse,  and  cure  cancer.  For  example,  at  one  site  (http://
azunimags.bigstep.com/item.jhtml?UCIDs=525663|1230205&
PRID=1169182)  purveyors  of  cancer-curing  magnets  will  sell
you, for only $2,595, the “Dr. Philpott Designed and Approved
Polar Power Super Bed Grid.” According to the site, “This is the
strongest,  deepest  penetrating,  permanent  static  magnet,  bio-
magnetic therapy device available anywhere that we know of. It
is used in many of Dr. Philpotts’ magnetic research protocols for
prevention  and  reversal  of  cancer  and  other  serious  disease  that
requires a full systemic deep penetrating treatment of the whole
body.”  Similarly  absurd  claims  can  be  found  at  www.stop-
cancer.com/magnets.htm.
Do  the  legions  of  magnet  therapists  and  magnet  purveyors
really believe the incredible claims that they make? Are they well-
meaning but misguided individuals or con artists willing to say
anything to make a buck? Both types are most likely involved.
Studies on Magnet Therapy
The overall conclusion of our BMJreview was stated in the first sen-
tence, “We believe there is a worldwide epidemic of useless magnet
therapy”  (Finegold  and  Flamm  2006).  As  you  can  imagine,  this
statement was not well-received in the magnet healing community.
We   f o u n d   t h a t   m a n y   s t u d i e s   o n   “m a g n e t   t h e r a p y”   we re   p u b l i s h e d
in “alternative” journals as opposed to peer-reviewed medical jour-
nals.  Many  studies  included  too  few  patients  to  reach  statistically
significant  conclusions.  Others  had  problems  with  their  placebo
control groups. For example, study subjects realized that they were
wearing a magnetic bracelet rather than a placebo bracelet when it
attracted paper clips or other small metal objects. In light of the vast
amounts of money spent each year on supposedly therapeutic mag-
nets,  surprisingly  few  legitimate  randomized  controlled  trials  have
been  conducted  to  evaluate  their  efficacy.  An  excellent  critique  of
magnet  therapy  by  Quackwatch  founder  Stephen  Barrett,  M.D.,
can  be  found  at  www.quackwatch.org/04ConsumerEducation/
QA/magnet.html.
Bruce  L.  Flamm,  M.D.,  is  a  physician  and  medical  researcher
who  has  a  major  interest  in  supporting  science  over  superstition
and evidence-based medicine over quackery. His ongoing investi-
gation of the bizarre Cha/Wirth/Lobo Columbia University “Pray
for  Pregnancy”  study  (SKEPTICALINQUIRER,  September/October
2004 and March/April 2005) has been featured in Timemaga-
zine, The New York Times, and dozens of other newspapers and
magazines all over the world.
SI J-A 2006 pgs  5/30/06  1:41 PM  Page 27

28Volume 30, Issue 4SKEPTICAL INQUIRER
Is Magnet Therapy Even Theoretically Possible?
In reality, many people find anecdotal reports of healing, partic-
ularly from athletes or other trusted celebrities, to be more con-
vincing than scientific studies.
There are certainly many people touting magnet therapy. But
is there, even theoretically, any way that magnets could have any
healing effect? In our BMJreview we restricted our comments to
typical magnetic devices claimed to have therapeutic value: these
use  “static”  magnets  like  those  used  to  attach  paper  notes  to  a
refrigerator  door.  In  this  context, staticmeans  nonmoving  and
has  nothing  to  do  with  static  electricity.  Moving  magnets  or
pulsed  electromagnets  can  create  electric  fields  and  electromag-
netic  radiation  that  could  have  some  effect  on  living  tissue.  In
contrast, a typical nonmoving magnet produces only a magnetic
field.  Is  there  anything  in  the  human  body  that  is  affected  by
magnetic fields? Surprisingly, the answer appears to be no. This
seems  counterintuitive  since  most  people  know  that  oxygen  in
our  blood  is  carried  by  hemoglobin  and  that  hemoglobin  con-
tains  iron. This  is  why  iron  tablets  are  often  recommended  for
the treatment of anemia. However, the iron in hemoglobin is not
ferromagnetic  (see  www.badscience.net/?p=88  and  www.hfien-
berg.com/clips/magnet.htm).  If  hemoglobin  contained  ferro-
magnetic iron it would be simple to separate red blood cells from
other bloods cells with a magnet. Several studies have shown that
static  magnetic  fields  do  not  affect  blood  flow  (see  www.hfien-
berg.com/clips/magnet.htm and www.quackwatch.org/01Quack
eryRelatedTopics/PhonyAds/florsheim.html).  Perhaps  more  im-
portant,  if  hemoglobin  contained  ferromagnetic  iron  people
might explode or be flung across the room when exposed to the
extraordinarily powerful magnetic field of a MRI scan. For a fas-
cinating  look  at  things  that  can  go  wrong  when  ferromagnetic
materials get too close to the powerful magnetic field of an MRI
machine,  visit  http://mripractice.tripod.com/mrpractice/id69.
htm and www.simplyphysics.com/flying_objects.html.
However, for the sake of argument, what if some effect of mag-
nets on human tissue could be demonstrated? What is the likeli-
hood  that  it  would  be  a  therapeutic  or  healing  effect?  Probably
slim to nil. By analogy, consider chemical compounds. The num-
ber of known chemical compounds is on the order of ten million.
However, only a handful have ever been shown to have any ther-
apeutic effects. Yet millions are toxic. It would be most unwise to
eat or drink anything found on the shelves of a typical chemistry
lab. If a magnet had an effect on human tissue, there is no reason
to believe that it would necessarily be a healing effect.
Moreover, even the rare chemical compound that has healing
effects usually does so only in very specific dose ranges. Almost
any prescription drug can harm or kill you if you ingest enough
of it. If, theoretically, a magnet had some effect on human tissue
and  if,  astoundingly,  the  effect  was  beneficial  rather  than  toxic,
would one not expect there to be an optimal dosage? Yet, adver-
tised  healing  magnets  vary  widely  in  their  field  strength.  Many
magnet purveyors claim that the more powerful the magnet, the
greater  the  healing  effect.  This  sounds  good  but  makes  little
sense.  All  known  effective  therapies—including  medications,
x-rays,  and  lasers—become  toxic  or  damaging  at  high  levels.
Nevertheless,  the  “magnet  therapist”  who  debated  me  on  BBC
radio immediately after our paper was published chided me for
not  understanding  that  some  magnet  healers  fail  because  they
don’t  use  strong  enough  magnets.  She  was  so  convincing  that  I
think she actually believes this. The BBC radio host made a point
of stating that the magnet therapist was “certified.” By whom, I
wondered?  The  Intergalactic  Association  of  Magnetic  and
Crystal Healers? After the show my colleague Professor Finegold,
who  was  raised  in  the  United  Kingdom,  informed  me  that  the
word  “certified”  has  a  derogatory  mental  health  connotation  in
the UK. Perhaps the BBC host was not flattering my opponent.
Some magnet advocates contend that no one has conclusively
proven  that  magnets  cannot  heal.  Of  course,  they  have  it  back-
wards.  When  it  comes  to  healing,  the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
seller, not the buyer. One is supposed to prove that a therapy works
before  marketing  it  to  the  public.  If  this  were  not  true,  medical
companies could save billions by selling all sorts of untested drugs
and devices. In reality, the government insists that every medicine
and therapeutic device be meticulously tested for both safety and
efficacy. This protective system generally works and only rarely do
unsafe  or  ineffective  products  slip  through  and  reach  the  public.
Sadly, it seems that no such protective laws exist for magnets, crys-
tals, amulets, magic potions, or other claimed miracle cures.
Finally, in the firestorm of criticism that followed the publica-
tion of our BMJarticle, a frequent complaint was that I don’t have
an  “open”  mind.  It  might  be  more  fair  to  say  that  my  mind  is
open—but  not  to  nonsense.  If  properly  conducted  research
demonstrates  a  genuine  healing  effect  of  static  magnets,  I  will
cheerfully  incorporate  magnet  therapy  into  my  clinical  practice.
Until that time, I hope that parents will take their sick children to
evidence-based physicians rather than “certified” magnet healers.
Notes
1. Brody, J. 2000. Less pain: Is it in the magnets or in the mind? New York
Times, November 28: F9.
2. Weintraub, M. 1999. Magnetic bio-stimulation in painful diabetic periph-
eral neuropathy: A novel intervention—a randomized, double-placebo crossover
study. American Journal of Pain Management 9: 8–17.
3.  Finegold,  L.,  and  B.L.  Flamm.  2006.  Magnet  therapy:  Extraordinary
claims, but no proved benefits. British Medical Journal332: 4.!
Is there anything in the human
body that is affected by
magneticfields? Surprisingly,
the answer appears to be
no.If
hemoglobin contained ferromagnetic
iron it would be simple to separate
red blood cells from other
bloods cells with a magnet.
SI J-A 2006 pgs  5/30/06  1:42 PM  Page 28
