Basic Page
Case Studies
Case studies, as a method of descriptive research, requires an outside observer to keep in-depth descriptive records of an individual or group of individuals and their experiences.  Typical data collected includes biographical data, medical records, family history, general observations, interviews, and the results of various psychological tests.
Strengths of Case Studies:  Case studies are particularly useful when researchers want to obtain a detailed contextual view of an individual's life.  In the social sciences, case studies are often used to help understand the social and familial factors that might be part of the development of some form of deviant behaviour in an individual.  Natural scientists might use this method to study a single animal or an instance of some physical phenomenon.  Case studies are also useful when researchers cannot, for practical or ethical reasons, perform experimental studies.
(Reference, Maricopa Community Colleges).
Limitations of Case Studies:  Similar to the other methodologies in this category, a case study is a descriptive method, not an explanatory one.  Without the controlled conditions of a laboratory, conclusions about cause-and-effect relationships cannot be drawn.  Behaviour can only be described, not explained.  Case studies are often used to study one person or a small group and thus any data gathered may not necessarily represent the general group or population.  Also, case studies usually require people to recall past events and, with memory, sometimes important details are unintentionally skewed or omitted.
Example Case Study
Please review the example of a Case Study below:
The Lost Mariner
What happens to a man when he loses track of his own age?  In a case study summarized from the book, "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat," by Dr. Oliver Sacks, Jimmy finds himself in this predicament.  Jimmy, a healthy 49 year-old man, was admitted to a home for the aged near New York City in early 1975.  Health care professionals learned that Jimmy grew up in a small town and had an ordinary childhood.  After graduating high school Jimmy was drafted into the Navy in 1943 and served as a radio operator on a submarine.
During his time in the Navy, Jimmy had little contact with his family except for a brother he saw from time to time.  Each time Jimmy saw his brother he was always amazed at how old he looked.  Jimmy always thought his brother was a young man.  The following is a partial transcript of a clinical interview from Sacks’s book.  The year is 1975.
Dr:  "What year is this, Mr. G?"
Jimmy: "Forty-five, man.  What do you mean?  We've won the war, FDR's dead, Truman's at the helm.  There are great times ahead."
Dr:  "And you Jimmie, how old would you be?"
Jimmy:  "Why, I guess I'm nineteen, Doc.  I'll be twenty next birthday."
Doctors quickly determined that Jimmy had an extreme loss of recent memory; in fact he had little or no memory for events that took place between the late forties (when he was still in the Navy) and 1975.  Reports indicated that Jimmy was competent while in the Navy and upon his release in 1961.  In 1971, however, a disoriented Jimmy was admitted to a hospital.  He was given the diagnosis of advanced organic brain syndrome due to alcohol.  Tests, such as EEGs, found no massive brain damage but did find a decrease in size (atrophy) in areas of the brain known to be involved in the storage of long-term memories.
 Intelligence tests showed Jimmy to have significant ability and aptitude for science and mathematics, but only if the questions posed could be answered quickly.  If the questions were too long, Jimmy would forget the first part of the problem and even what the question was.
case studies: descriptions of various data collected from a range of sources to gain insight into the behaviour of groups or individuals .
this link opens in a new window/tab)
