Basic Page
Research Topic Analysis
Using the Question Checklist will help you determine if your research topic is suitable for psychological research.
Colour of Dog Food Bowls
Let's look at this topic in more depth.
Is your topic interesting enough to motivate you throughout your research and experimentation?
Yes - If my pet was overweight I would want to make sure I didn't entice him or her to overeat!
OR
No - I don't have a pet and I don't really find this problem interesting.  I will think of another topic.
Are you able to find information surrounding your topic?
Yes - Some websites deal with dog vision and dog eating, but none with this specific focus.  A good URL to review is: Are Dogs Colour Blind?
Is your responding and/or manipulated variable measurable? For example, can you count it, weigh it, time it, or does it have two states such as on or off, used or not used?
Yes - The manipulated variable is the bowl colour.  You can test to see if dogs eat more food from white bowls compared to other coloured bowls.  The responding variable is measurable with a scale.  You can weigh the amount of dog food given and remaining in each colour of bowl
Are you able to control other factors that may affect your results?
Yes - You can control the type of food, amount of food, type of dog, age of dog, activity level of dog, gender of dog, etc...
Is your experiment ethical and safe to conduct?
Yes - No animal will be injured physically or emotionally.
Are you able to find and/or purchase the materials for your experiment?
Depends - You need access to many dogs of the same gender, age, and breed.  The dogs might be very difficult to obtain.  You will also need access to a store selling bowls and dog food.
Are you able to repeat your experiment at least twice?
Yes -(If your answer is not yes, find another question.)
Is this problem suitable for conducting psychological research?
Although the above example is a valid research problem, it might not be the best problem because of the number of dogs required.  In general, human test subjects are easier to find and test.
