As you know, all psychologists study behaviour.  Many psychologists want to determine what is regular behaviour for a given population.  In psychology, a simple definition of a statistical deviation (from normal) could be stated as a noticeable departure from those traits or behaviours possessed by the majority of people.
If we use adult height as an example, a noticeable departure from the average or norm would be a seven-foot tall individual (2.13 metres) or a four-foot tall individual (1.22 metres).  Because the heights of the majority of adults are less extreme than either of these two examples, we can say that the two heights (seven feet and four feet) are abnormal.
To restate this idea, individuals with characteristics and behaviours that are not within an average range (characteristics falling beyond a particular distance from the average value) can sometimes be considered abnormal.  To continue with our height example, we can use 5 feet 10 inches as the mathematical average (mean) height of Canadian men.  Many men are either taller than 5 feet 10 inches or shorter than 5 feet 10 inches but are not considered abnormal with respect to height.  Scientists can statistically show "abnormal" by collecting data, calculating the average, determining the standard deviation, and then finding all individuals that are farther than two standard deviations away from the average.  The individuals farther than two standard deviations from the average generally make up about 5% of the sample population.  This can be graphically displayed in a distribution curve also known as a bell curve or a normal distribution .
If the entire population of Alberta completed an IQ test, the scores would fall into a bell-shaped curve around the mean of 100.  More than two-thirds of the population would score between 85 and 115.  About 5% of the population would score less than 70 or more than 130.  IQ scores below 55 and above 145 are very rare.
Although the statistical method of determining abnormality (characteristics or behaviour falling outside the "norm") is scientific and valid, it does nothing to address certain important issues such as health and welfare.  For example, in the past two decades the bell curve for weight (mass) in North America has shifted right (with mass on the x-axis).  This means that we, as a society, are on average becoming heavier.  This may be the norm, but is it healthy?  Is it a good thing?
Scientists must have a common understanding or definition of scientific concepts and processes so that communication is effective and misunderstandings are reduced.  For example, scientists from many countries know that on the periodic table the symbol K represents the metal potassium although they may not have the same word associated with the symbol. Having a common language and common understanding of important concepts is vital to accurate communication.  A chemist in the Ukraine might not understand what l'eau, Wasser, and el agua mean (the French, German, and Spanish words for "water"), but he or she would know that H 2 O(l) represents that wonderful liquid!
