Animal ResearchImageHumans owe gratitude to the animals that have been used in scientific experimentation.  By far, animal research has contributed the most to our knowledge of basic learning process and motivational systems.
Critical information on topics such as vision, taste, hearing, hunger, thirst, cognition, fear, anxiety, and memory has resulted from animal experimentation.  While alternatives to using animals have been proposed, many fundamental questions require research with fully functioning animals.  Although most animal research relates to biological or medical experimentation, about 7 to 8% of psychological research involves animals (American Psychological Association [APA], 2007), typically rodents and birds.
One research project from the department of Psychiatry at the University of Alberta investigated the "reward centres" in the human brain.  To survive and perpetuate the species, humans need to experience eating, drinking, and having intercourse as rewarding activities.  If these activities did not stimulate our reward centres, the human race would soon cease.
The research (conducted by Dave Hayes) built on the knowledge that activities such as gambling and taking drugs unnaturally stimulate our reward centres.  Because rats and human brains have similar reward pathways, the research involved artificially stimulating rat brains so that we may learn more about behaviour relating to drug abuse and addiction.  Is using rats in this fashion ethical?
The APA Guidelines for Ethical Conduct in the Care and Use of Animals suggest that
"Psychologists undertake research with animals with a clear scientific purpose.  - There should be a reasonable expectation that the research will a) increase knowledge of the processes underlying the evolution, development, maintenance, alteration, control, or biological significance of behaviour, b) increase understanding of the species under study, or c) provide results that benefit the health or welfare of humans or other animals."
In North America, regulations and guidelines have been created for the treatment and use of animals in research, but failure to comply with the guidelines does not result in fines or any other significant consequence.  If caught treating test animals unethically, scientists may have their membership in the APA revoked and they may be exposed to "negative press" and/or peer pressure.  In some circumstances, consumers may no longer purchase products that have been tested on animals.  What one person considers ethical, as you may know, may be unethical to another.
