The Placebo Effect
A simple description of the placebo effect relates to the belief systems of participants.  When a participant's symptoms are changed (usually reduced) by an inert treatment (such as sugar pills, fake surgery, fake psychotherapy), the change is attributed to the individual expecting or believing that the treatment will work.  The placebo effect, in essence, is a measurable, observable, or perceived improvement in health (physical or psychological) that is not attributable to the treatment.  The apparent "power of suggestion" actually causes participant symptoms to improve.
Source: https://youtu.be/5RhG_ySxhDA
According to Dr. Bratman, the placebo effect almost always comes as a surprise to those doctors and patients or researchers and participants who experience the phenomenon.  For example, surgeons used to think that arthroscopic surgery for knee arthritis really worked, and hundreds of thousands of such surgeries were performed every year.  Then a study was released showing that fake surgery produces just as satisfactory and long-lasting benefits as the real thing.  Other examples that Dr. Bratman identifies include the following:
 In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of 30 people with carpal tunnel syndrome, use of a static magnet produced dramatic and enduring benefits, but so did use of fake magnets.
In a study of 321 people with low back pain, chiropractic manipulation was quite helpful, but no more helpful than giving patients an educational booklet on low back pain.
In a randomized, controlled trial of 67 people with hip pain, acupuncture produced significant benefits, but no greater benefits than placing needles in random locations (on the body).
 In a randomized, controlled trial of 177 people with neck pain, fake laser acupuncture proved to be more effective than massage.
Note that these studies do not actually disprove the tested therapies.
The study sizes might have simply been too small to detect a modest benefit.  What they do show, however, is that comparison to placebo treatment is essential: without such comparison, any random form of treatment, no matter how worthless in itself, is likely to appear to be effective (Bratman, 2007).
