Case Study 9
Pellagra (A Corny Story)

When European explorers returned from North America in the mid 1700s, they brought
with them corn.  Corn, soon after, became a popular crop for European landowners who
would often pay farm workers with a share of the crop yield.  Corn thus became an
important part of the diet of both North American and European farm workers.

By the late 1700s, farm workers became easy to recognize
in a crowd as they often had crusty reddened skin.  This
skin condition was called pellagra -- the Italian word for
rough skin.  Many people believed that pellagra was
caused by the consumption of rotten corn.  Other
symptoms of pellagra included a red tongue, sore mouth,
diarrhea, and dementia.

In the early 1900s, pellagra was common in the Southern part of the United States.  Many
people began to think that pellagra was not caused by spoiled corn but from a
communicable infection passed from one person to another.  Many of the affected
individuals were eventually placed in insane asylums because of the dementia that
ensued.  Because so many affected individuals were in one location, a physician named
Goldberger was able to collect data on how pellagra might be transmitted.  What he
found from his research indicated that pellagra was not a communicable disease because
none of the doctors, nurses, or attendants who worked in the asylum contracted the
unique condition.

What then was the cause of pellagra?  Goldberger suspected that corn in the diet, or more
specifically the overall diet of an individual, played an important role in the development
of the disease.

To test his theory that a poor diet caused pellagra, Goldberger asked for and received
government funding to supplement the asylum patients’ diets with meat and dairy
products.  To his delight, almost all of the patients recovered after their diets were
supplemented!

To prove conclusively that a poor diet caused pellagra, however, Goldberger knew he
would have to conduct an experiment to see if a poor diet could induce the pellagra.  The
question of who to use as test subjects posed a problem for Goldberger.  The ethics of the
day required willing subjects.  Who would volunteer to contract such an affliction?

Goldberger asked the director of a prison in Mississippi if he could use prison volunteers
for a six-month study on diet as it relates to pellagra.  The director gave approval and
inmates who agreed to full participation for the six months would be released at the end
of the study.  Goldberger had plenty of volunteers!

Participants could eat as much food as they wanted during the six months, but they could
eat only corn biscuits, corn mush, corn bread, collard greens, and coffee.  After about five
months, the prisoners were not very happy.  They developed skin lesions, stomachaches,
and red tongues.  Goldberger had proven conclusively that diet caused pellagra.  The
specific nutrient that caused pellagra was identified after Goldberger’s death.  Corn has
low levels of niacin, a B vitamin, and a deficiency in this vitamin is what causes pellagra
– not rotten corn!
