Macbeth

The Entire Play

1. INSTRUCTIONS—THE PLAY
Circle the best answer for the following questions. (12 MARKS)

1. By attributing the Thane of Cawdor to the witches rather than to his own actions, Macbeth reveals he

a. is opportunistic and malleable

b. lacks confidence and has poor self-esteem

c. is modest and believes he is undeserving of his new title

d. is superstitious and believes his destiny is not in his control

2. Lady Macbeth does not kill Duncan herself because

she lacks the valour

the guards are still awake

killing is a man’s profession

the king reminds her of her father

pe oTP

3. When Macbeth refuses to put the guards’ daggers back in the room, Lady Macbeth

hides the daggers down the well

assumes responsibility for protecting their alibi
causes such an uproar that she wakes the porter
ridicules Macbeth until he does as she commands

Sep

4, In Act IV, Macduff wants to go to war against Macbeth because he

a. considers Macbeth a tyrant

b. desires the kingdom for himself

c. wants to show his wife that he is brave
d. wishes to avenge the death of Donalbain

5. In Act IV, Lady Macduff calls her husband a traitor because

Macbeth supports Macduff

Macbeth considers Macduff a traitor
Macduff is raising an army against Macbeth
Macduff has abandoned her and her children

ao oP

6. Malcolm initially refuses Macduff’s help because he

has no money

does not trust him

does not want to be king

knows Macduff’s wife has been killed

Bo FS

7. Malcolm tests Macduff’s loyalty by saying that he

a. does not desire to be king

b. has more vices than Macbeth

c. thinks Macduff killed Duncan

d. does not need Macduff’s support

8. In Act V, Lady Macbeth

is troubled by her misdeeds

helps Malcolm defeat Macbeth

plots to kill her husband to rule by herself’
returns to her chamber and commits suicide

ae se

9. At his wife’s death, Macbeth

accepts fate
swears revenge
vows to change
seeks redemption

ao FP

10. By pitting Young Siward against Macbeth, Shakespeare aims to

reveal the power of paternal command

emphasize how much Macbeth has changed
suggest the foolishness of inexperienced soldiers
demonstrate the meaninglessness of a soldier’s life

Rese

11. Macbeth’s evil side is associated with

blood.
insanity
chivalry
darkness

aegp

12. Macbeth’s tragic flaw is

greed
apathy
ambition
wickedness

ao FP

Tl. INSTRUCTIONS—THE PIECES

Provide a complete definition and an example from Macbeth for each of the literary terms listed below. Marks
will be deducted for spelling, grammatical, and convention errors that impede communication and are below
the standards expected at a 20-1 level. Each definition is worth three points, each example one. (16 MARKS)

TERM DEFINITION EXAMPLE FROM MACBETH

allusion

dramatic
irony

dramatic
purpose

soliloquy

IH.INSTRUCTIONS—THE PARTS

Identify the speaker of the following quotations and discuss their significance to the play. Marks will be
deducted for spelling, grammatical, and convention errors that impede communication and are below the
standards expected at a 20-1 level. Each speaker is worth one point, each discussion two. (12 MARKS)

QUOTATION SPEAKER SIGNIFICANCE

But wherefore could not I
pronounce “Amen”? / I had most
need of blessing, and “Amen” /
Stuck in my throat.

Upon my head they placed a
fruitless crown / And put a barren
scepter in my grip, / Thence to be
wrenched from an unlineal hand[.]

By the pricking of my thumbs, /
Something wicked this way comes.

I have no words: / My voice is in
my sword: thou bloodier villain /
Than terms can give thee out!

IV. INSTRUCTIONS—THE PUZZLE
Fully address the following item. Demonstrate your understanding of narrative and dramatic purpose. Marks

will be deducted for spelling, grammatical, and convention errors that impede communication and are below
the standards expected at a 20-1 level. (10 MARKS)

The murder of Duncan is committed offstage. The murders of Act IV Scene 2 are committed in
front of the audience. Dramatically, what is the difference?

V. INSTRUCTIONS—THE PLAYER

These lines, delivered by Macbeth shortly before he is killed, are magnificent. Demonstrate your understanding
of Shakespearean prose and paraphrase them. Take care not to offend me with sloppy thinking or sloppy
writing; these lines deserve only the best. Make it so, citizen. (10 MARKS)

To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,

To the last syllable of recorded time;

And all our yesterdays have lighted fools

The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more: it is a tale

Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.
