Macbeth Li
William Shakespeare

1. “Man proposes, God disposes” is an example of antithesis from a poem by Alexander
Pope. Can you find some examples in this scene? How do these antitheses emphasize
the mood?

2. Opening scenes are attention-getters. As an Elizabethan stage director, how would
you make this twelve-line scene engage an audience?

Macbeth Liii

William Shakespeare

. How can Banquo be “lesser than Macbeth, and greater,” and “not so happy, yet much
happier”?

What does this line mean? “If chance will have me King, why chance may crown me
without my stir.”

Some people contend that this scene goes on far too long. Consider how you might
create a shorter version of it. Justify your choices.

Macbeth L.iv
William Shakespeare

1. The conversation between Duncan and Macbeth is filled with ironies. What does this
conversation reveal about both Duncan and Macbeth? While Duncan may not be
aware of the irony, Macbeth probably is. How, then, might he deliver his lines?

Macbeth I.v
William Shakespeare

1. Some critics argue that there are too many scenes in this act—there are seven. They
contend that these scenes should not be separate but should all flow seamlessly
together. Determine how you might make such an idea work on stage.

Macbeth L.vii

William Shakespeare

1. What does Macbeth’s long soliloquy at the beginning of this scene mean?

Macbeth ILi
William Shakespeare

1. At what time does this scene take place? Support your inference with textual
evidence.

2. What feelings does Macbeth reveal in his soliloquy at the end of this scene?

Macbeth IL.ii

William Shakespeare

. The act done, how does Macbeth feel?

. We do not see the death of Duncan on stage. Consider why it is not included in this
scene. Would you personally have chosen to include it? What difference would it
make to the play if it were included? Discuss, in a multi-paragraph response, the
advantages and disadvantages of either choice.

Macbeth [Lin
William Shakespeare

1. In Act I, Scene 3, Macbeth talks about “horrible imaginings.” In Act II, Scene 3, there
are many of them. Make a list of all that you can find, who has them, and what their
cumulative effect is on the play so far. What might they bode for the future?

Macbeth ILiv
William Shakespeare

1. Shakespeare often uses references to the weather and strange occurrences to create an
ominous mood. Give examples from this scene. What do they suggest?

Macbeth HLi

William Shakespeare

1.

This scene could be rather static if it were not blocked effectively. Blocking means
figuring out how, where, and when the actors will move on stage as well as the
gestures they will use so that the audience becomes involved in what is going on.
Create a blocking diagram you might use for your production of this scene, along
with a brief explanation of your rationale. Decide too how Macbeth will deliver the
final two lines of the scene and, in a paragraph, explain your choice.

Macbeth IIL.iv

William Shakespeare

1.

There are some fascinating images used in this scene. Make a list of the ones you find
most powerful and explain how they help support the mood created during the
banquet. You may have to consult the notes in the text to help you understand some
of the references.

Macbeth II.v

William Shakespeare

1.

Most critics believe this scene is probably not written by Shakespeare; many directors
omit it altogether. Discuss why this scene might have been added. Consider the
aspects that would make it popular with audiences of the time and the links it might
have to the rest of the play.

Macbeth IV.i

William Shakespeare

1.

There seems to be some argument about whether Act III, Scene 6 is misplaced and
perhaps should come after Act IV, Scene 1. Discuss this possibility and decide the
pros and cons of moving it.

Macbeth’s utterance “Let this pernicious hour / Stand aye accursed in the calendar” is
probably more prophetic than anything the witches have said. Explain the deep irony
in his exclamation and what it suggests about his state of mind at this point in the
play. Has he been thinking this all along or is this a sudden decision made as a result
of his consultation with the witches?

Macbeth’s soliloquy that ends this scene is significant because it reveals his current
thoughts. Paraphrase this speech so you are clear about what it says and what it
reveals about Macbeth’s character and intentions at this time. Comment about his
intended course of action and the wisdom of his decision.

Macbeth IV.ii

William Shakespeare

1.

The murder of Duncan was carried out offstage. The murders in this scene are
committed in front of the audience. Dramatically, what is the difference? In your
production of the play, would you move these murders offstage as well? Write an
explanation of your decision.

Macbeth V.i
William Shakespeare

1. Lady Macbeth seems to have instigated the actions that her husband eventually took.
Why is she now so disturbed by the results of what she has done? Think back and
determine her motives for Duncan’s murder. Did she misjudge her husband? herself?
the consequences? Look back at your earlier character sketches of this woman. In
your updated portrait of Lady Macbeth, determine what kind of person you believe
she really is.

Macbeth V.ii

William Shakespeare

. Lennox ends this scene with three remarkably poetic lines (35-37). What do you think
is suggested in this description? What do you make of the references to the “flower”
and the “weeds”? Using these three lines, discuss the value of metaphor in conveying
meaning. What, exactly, does Lennox mean, and why would he say such a thing?
Why would he speak metaphorically under these circumstances? Do people normally
speak this way when under pressure? How do you account for this scene’s ending?

Macbeth V.iii

William Shakespeare

1. Lines 46-52 contain an extended metaphor that conveys Macbeth’s feelings that
everything “weighs upon the heart.” Explain that metaphor, and as the doctor, write
your diagnosis of Macbeth’s current state of mind. Is he curable?

2. In his soliloquy (22-31), Macbeth expresses his unhappiness about the way things
have turned out for him. In your opinion, is this an accurate assessment of what his
future holds? How did it get this way? Are the witches responsible for Macbeth’s
present situation? To what degree? Does Macbeth blame himself? What possible
advice, ifany, could you offer Macbeth at this stage?

3. Do you see anything at all heroic (assuming heroic to mean “noble and admirable”)
about Macbeth in this scene?

Macbeth V.v

William Shakespeare

1.

Lines 21-30 in Scene 5 have become famous because writers frequently quote them.
How do you interpret the ambiguity in the line “She should have died hereafter”? The
rest of this speech focuses on time. What does Macbeth say about it, and what
happened to get him to such an awareness? If you could draw a picture of “time” as
Macbeth sees it, what would it look like? How would you explain Macbeth’s state of
mind at this time: is he frightened, exhausted, resigned, depressed, or some
combination of these? Is anyone present when he utters this speech? What is the most
powerful image in this speech for you? How does the image achieve this outcome?

Macbeth V.vi

William Shakespeare

1. Scene 6 contains only eleven lines. What does it accomplish in those eleven lines?
Why do we need to know that Siward and his son will lead the first battle? Would
you leave this scene out of your production of the play?

Macbeth V.viii
William Shakespeare

1. Some people feel that Macduff goaded Macbeth into fighting him by calling him a
“coward,” much as Lady Macbeth did earlier in the play. Obviously, Macbeth does
not want such a label. Why not? How do you define a coward?
