Module 4—Mechanisms of Population Change 
 Module Summary
“It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent that survives. It is the one that is the most adaptable to change.” 
Charles Darwin – The Origin of Species 
In this module you studied the mechanisms of population change and learned how changes in population can lead to evolution. Evolution is the change in populations over time. Variations are essential to a population’s survival. The variations or differences between individuals are created through sexual reproduction and mutations. Populations with greater variation are more likely to survive if their environment changes. Variations that give an organism an advantage are called adaptations. 
In Lesson 2 of this module, you investigated past and present theories on which biologists base their theories. Two early theorists—Lamarck and Darwin—proposed theories of evolution and population change. A comparison of these two scientists showed that they had different ideas about how population characteristics changed over time. Darwin’s theory of natural selection is the theory that is widely accepted today, and it is used to explain how nature is involved in population change. 
Throughout this module you read articles and viewed examples of populations evolving. These changes were explained by the theory of natural selection. Natural selection dictates that organisms most suited to survive in an environment because of their adaptations will live to reproduce and pass on these adaptations. Today’s scientists also have two theories proposing the rate of evolution. You studied the two different models—gradualism and punctuated equilibrium. The gradualism model describes evolution as a slow, steady, and continuous process; whereas the punctuated model describes evolution as a process that occurs in rapid bursts followed by long periods of little change. The speed at which evolution occurs is still up for debate, but scientists agree that populations have changed over time and evolution has occurred. 
There is much evidence to support evolution. Some of this evidence was studied in Lesson 3. The fossil record has given scientists information about evolution for many years. Comparative anatomy and embryology are useful tools for distinguishing evolutionary relationships between different species of organisms. Biogeography, genetics, and biochemistry are some other areas of study where evidence for evolution can be found. 
In the final lesson of this module, you learned about the methods by which new species can evolve. In order for change to occur, variation must be present in a population. There also must be environmental changes that encourage natural selection. Finally, there must be reproductive isolation. Barriers, such as geographical isolation or biological isolation, effectively prevent two populations from interbreeding. Over time, each population adapts to its environment. If the adaptations have become so different that successful mating will not occur, then speciation has taken place. 
This module has allowed you to investigate the history of organisms on Earth. It also allows you to explain the process of evolution by looking at scientific theory and evidence supporting those theories. With this information, you can predict possible evolutionary outcomes based on your knowledge of natural selection and speciation. 
Questions to think about:
 How is sexual reproduction significant in creating variation within populations?
 How can mutations improve or harm an individual organism's change for survival and reproduction?
 How do variations lead to evolution of populations?
 How to the Lamarckian and Darwinian explanations of evolutionary change compare?
 What evidence exists to support the theory of evolution?
 What is speciation and what conditions are required for this process?
 How do scientists currently explain evolution? 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education