Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
In This Module
Lesson 1—An Introduction to Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
If you want to live on Mars, you need to know the basics of photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Understanding these two processes will help you produce the food you will eat and the oxygen you will breathe during your stay on Mars. In this lesson you will review the basics of photosynthesis and cellular respiration. Can you name two organelles that are the sites for photosynthesis and cellular respiration? Lesson 1 will help you review cell structures and functions. You will also review the various mechanisms used for transporting materials in and out of cells, along with the role of ATP. You will be introduced to new vocabulary so that it becomes more familiar to you as you work through this module. As you will find in the following lessons, these topics are very important to help develop a full understanding of photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
 What pathways do energy and matter follow in living organisms?
Lesson 2—Light-Dependent Reactions
Have you ever forgotten to open your window blinds before going on vacation? What happened to your plants? You may have made this mistake despite knowing that your plants need water and sunlight to grow. In this lesson you will explore the specific role of water and sunlight in photosynthesis. This lesson introduces the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis that release oxygen.
 How does the energy from light flow through living systems?
 How does oxygen become a product of photosynthesis?
Lesson 3—The Light-Independent Reactions of Photosynthesis
Does photosynthesis stop if you turn off the lights? Part of photosynthesis occurs when light is not available. This lesson introduces the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis where carbon dioxide is used to produce glucose.
 How is carbon dioxide used during the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis?
 How are ATP and NADPH produced by the light-dependent reactions used to make glucose?
Lesson 4—Investigating Photosynthesis
 In this lesson you will further explore photosynthesis.
 What factors affect photosynthesis?
 What technologies have emerged from photosynthesis-based research?
Lesson 5—Anaerobic Respiration
What, no oxygen? No problem. Cellular respiration can still occur, but much less efficiently. This lesson introduces anaerobic cellular respiration. Not only will you learn about those pesky leg cramps that occur in the middle of a race, but you will also determine how alcohol and bread are made.
 How far can cellular respiration go without the presence of oxygen?
 How does anaerobic respiration release potential energy from organic compounds?
Lesson 6—Aerobic Respiration
Oxygen is the gas that allows you to survive! People actually need oxygen to efficiently obtain energy from sugar molecules. This lesson introduces the aerobic stage of cellular respiration.
 How does the presence of oxygen affect cellular respiration?
 How does aerobic cellular respiration release potential energy from organic compounds?
Lesson 7—Investigating Cellular Respiration
 In this lesson you will further explore cellular respiration.
 How can you demonstrate quantitatively that germinating seeds consume oxygen?
 How do metabolic toxins affect cellular respiration?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education