Module 3—Ecosystem Diversity
Module Introduction
In this module you will examine the components that make up ecosystems and how these components interact. This module builds on your knowledge of interactions of organisms within ecosystems from Unit A, and it draws on your knowledge of biological diversity from Science 7, 8, and 9. 
If you have ever travelled even just a few hours from home, you will have experienced ecosystem diversity. There are many different ecosystems on the planet—rainforests, lakes, deserts, and grasslands. What makes each one unique? 
In Unit A the focus was on the biosphere and specific ecosystems. You looked at how energy and matter move through the biosphere and through specific ecosystems. Abiotic and biotic factors contribute to the movement of energy and matter, and it was discussed how human influence can sometimes interfere with energy flow and biogeochemical cycles. Distinct ecosystems were introduced. In Unit B you will look at more specific details within an ecosystem. These details will help you define what makes an ecosystem unique, build upon what you know about interactions between species, and further explore the role of abiotic and biotic factors in an environment. Human impact will also continue to be explored. This all brings you back to answering the following questions: 
 What makes an ecosystem distinct?
 How can you determine uniqueness?
 What can create changes in a distinct ecosystem?
 How can humans limit the impact of their activities?
By the end of this module you will have completed some activities to be marked by your teacher and others to help build confidence in your ability to understand, interpret, and express key course concepts. Everything should be saved so that you are able to review pieces of information for exams, project work, or discussions. For example, you will need to complete a Parks Canada Ecological Integrity Advertisement as your module project, and you will need to use information gathered throughout this module. When you are ready to attempt the module project, you will find the project description and marking rubrics in the Module Summary. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education