Module 3—Ecosystem Diversity
 Read
intraspecific competition: competition between members of the same populations (species) for a limited resource
exotic species: a species that is not native to an area and has been introduced, in most cases, by humans
introduced species: a species that is not native to an area and has been introduced, in most cases, by humans
interspecific competition: competition for limited resources among members of different species
Competition for resources—like food—will limit the size of any population. When there is no more food, members of the same species must compete for food. This will cause birth rates to decrease and death rates to increase, so the population decreases in size. This competition between members of the same species is called intraspecific competition.
Competition can occur between a native species and exotic species that have been introduced to an ecosystem. The introduction of exotic species or alien species is a problem around the world. Populations of exotic species can get out of control since these species do not have any natural predators or diseases to limit their populations. Some exotic species are introduced on purpose and others arrive by mistake. These introduced species can have a serious impact on the native ecosystem, since the introduced species may have a niche similar to the niche of a native species. This will cause competition. This is an example of interspecific competition, and this competition will limit the population size of the native species.
An Exotic Species Introduced to Australia
© 2007 Jupiterimages Corporation
Did you know that Australia has the largest population of wild camels in the world? In 2005 there were an estimated 700 000 camels roaming the continent. Camels were introduced to Australia between 1840 and 1907 as a way of opening up the desert outback. Camels helped build the rail and telegraph lines and also aided in supplying remote locations. Unfortunately, camels are now harming the native landscape and competing with cattle for vegetation.
Canada is not immune to the problem of exotic species. There are an estimated 800 species of exotic plant species living in the wild—this is roughly 16% of all the plants in Canada. Some of the exotic species of plants and animals in Canada include purple loosestrife, knapweed, zebra mussels, sea lampreys, and starlings.
 Try This 1 - Limiting Factors
Instructions: Complete both TR1 - Part A and Part B! 
TR1 - Part A: Burrowing Owls - Read the following article about the limiting factors facing burrowing owls. Create a table or flowchart to list and explain how each biotic and abiotic limiting factor affects the burrowing owl population in Alberta. The details of the requirements are on the Module 3: Lesson 5 Assignment.
http://www.srd.alberta.ca/FishWildlife/WildlifeManagement/documents/BurrowingOwls-CallPlaybackInAlberta-Summer2004.pdf
https://www.skburrowingowl.ca/about-owls/problems-facing-burrowing-owls 
p://www.ab-conservation.com/downloads/AWSR/Bird%20Reports/Status%20of%20Burrowing%20Owl%20in%20Alberta_update%202005.pdf
and
TR1 - Part B: Knapweed—The Super Competitor - Weeds can become a limiting factor to other organisms when the weeds are introduced to a new environment. Investigate and write two paragraphs about the biology/ecology of spotted knapweed (Centaurea biebersteinii). A graph of Knapweed population will also be analyzed. The details of the questions and graph are on the Module 3: Lesson 5 Assignment. NOTE: Parks Canada may be a good website to explore.
Knapweed Graph and Questions: 
1. Describe what has happened to the population of spotted knapweed since its arrival in British Columbia.
2.  Explain why some introduced species can become so invasive and damaging to native species and ecosystems.
3. Populations of spotted knapweed are present in Alberta. How could spotted knapweed spread throughout the province?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education