Module 7—The Digestive and Respiratory Systems 
In This Module
Lesson 1—Molecules of Living System
Have you ever thought about the nature of the food you eat? Just what are you getting with that burger and fries, and how does your body use it? This lesson introduces you to the chemical nature of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and their enzymes (carbohydrases, lipases, and proteases).
You will also study enzyme action and some factors influencing their action (temperature, pH, substrate concentration, feedback inhibition, and competitive inhibition).
 What are the chemical characteristics of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins and their corresponding enzymes?
 How are digestive enzyme functions controlled by the internal environment?
Lesson 2—The Digestive System
You have to eat to live, but have you thought about what happens to your food while it is being chewed and after it’s swallowed? This lesson begins with an introduction to the principal structures of the digestive system—the mouth, esophagus, stomach, sphincter, small and large intestines, liver, pancreas, and the gall bladder. You will be learning about the chemical and physical processing of food in the digestive system. You will also study how the nutrients that you need get out of the digestive system and into the circulatory system.
 How do the organs of the digestive system work together to digest carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins?
 In what way does the body facilitate the exchange of energy and matter from the digestive system?
Lesson 3—The Respiratory System
Take a deep breath, and get ready. You’re going to find out what happens when you breathe. You are going to study the principal structures of the respiratory system—nasal passages, pharynx, larynx, epiglottis, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, alveoli, diaphragm, rib muscles, and pleural membranes. You will learn how your respiratory system uses gas exchange, how it keeps foreign material from filling your lungs, and perhaps some unexpected results of breathing.
 How do the principle structures of the respiratory system act to exchange matter and transfer thermal energy between the body and the external environment?
Lesson 4—Science, Technology, and Society
Human systems do not always work perfectly. Homeostasis is easily disrupted by any variety of disorders that interfere with energy flow and matter exchange. Humans look to technology to help solve any problems they may experience. However, there is not always sufficient technology to provide solutions to all problems.
 How does technology provide solutions or limitations to the treatment of disorders affecting the digestive and respiratory systems?
 Module Assessment
You will be graded for your work in the Lesson 1 Assignment, Lesson 2 Assignment, Lesson 3 Assignment, and Lesson 4 Assignment. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education