Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
 Try This
TR 2. About 2% of solar energy is used for photosynthesis. Where’s the other 98%?
Explain where the other 98% of solar energy goes. Predict what would happen if there were fluctuations (an increase or a decrease) in these percentages. Also predict what might cause these changes. “Figure 1.4” on page 11 in your textbook may be helpful.
 Read
Read “Energy for Life in the Deep Ocean” on pages 12 and 13 of your textbook.
*Note: there is an online text you can use, it is located right in the course under the heading Textbook in the course content. You can also click on 'Other ' in the navigation bar, then 'Online Text'. This will create a new tab for you and you can access online text. If you require a paper copy of the book you can always print off the pages or go into the school and a book will be provided to you.
 Self-Check
SC 3. Answer question 7 on page 13 of the textbook.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 3. Chemosynthesis is similar to photosynthesis because they both use one form of energy to create the organic molecules required for life. This is the beginning of energy flow in a system lacking light.
A difference is that chemosynthetic organisms use the energy from splitting hydrogen sulfide bonds instead of energy from the Sun. Chemosynthetic organisms produce sulfuric acid instead of oxygen. Chemosynthetic organisms are mainly bacteria.
 Watch and Listen
A Closer Look at Producers and Chemosynthesis
Discovery: Arctic Hydrothermal Vents
The northernmost hydrothermal vent fields in the world were discovered in late July 2005 on a research expedition northwest of Norway.
Adam Schultz, COAS geophysicist who has studied hydrothermal systems since the 1980s, was part of the collaborative expedition with the University of Bergen, Norway. An instrument he created, called the Medusa Isosampler, played a key role in documenting the characteristics of the new vent fields.
Hydrothermal vents—also called “smokers” or “chimneys”—form along the Mid-Ocean Ridge, an area along the ocean floor where the Earth’s crust splits apart and new crust bubbles up in the form of lava from the mantle. The ridge is the Earth’s largest geologic feature; it zips up and down the middle of the world’s ocean basins like seams on a baseball, and is considered one of the most extreme environments on Earth.
“I’ve seen a lot of hydrothermal systems all over the world’s oceans,” Schultz said, “and these Arctic fields are spectacular.
“There is also a vast low-temperature field that supports a diverse community of life, including large sea-lilies that sit atop mineral-bacterial chimney-like structures that look like pineapples. That is a particularly strange form of vent, because the fluids come out at temperatures only a fraction of a degree above the temperature of the background seawater, and that is very cold—below zero Celsius—which is only possible in the Arctic.”
Much of the Arctic Ridge system is unexplored, and prior to this discovery, a vent field on the shelf of Iceland was the only one scientists had ever laid eyes upon. In marked contrast to that Icelandic field, the new fields are replete with animal life.1
1“Discovery: Arctic Hypothermal Vents,” Ocean & Air–A Magazine of Innovation in Earth Systems Science <http://oceanandair.coas.oregonstate.edu/index.cfm?fuseaction=content.display&pageID=91>, 4 September 2007. Reproduced by permission.
Discoveries like those discussed in the article explain how organisms are able to live in extreme environments where light is not available for producers to capture solar energy.
Here is a video to help you understand and see the process better.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education