Module 8—Circulation, Immunity, and Excretion 
Module Introduction
In this module you will study the circulatory system, the lymphatic system, the immune system, and the excretory system. Blood is a multifaceted fluid that transports material, clots after injuries, and provides a defence against invading pathogens. It also aids in maintaining fluid balance and temperature homeostasis. You will learn about T-cells, B-cells, and antibodies, which are all components of the defence system of the human body.
As well, you will gain an understanding of the ABO and Rh blood types. You will explore how the kidneys filter blood, reabsorb substances for reuse, and secrete excess or toxic substances as urine.  
You no doubt have had direct physical experience with these systems. If you have ever skinned your knee or cut your finger, you have seen first hand what blood looks like. You may have noticed that blood gushed from your wounds, slowed, and finally clotted to reclose the break in the circulatory system. The injury may have become sore and infected, but thanks to your immune system with its specialized white blood cells in your blood, an attack on invading germs prevented any greater damage.  
In this module you will have the opportunity to investigate the function of specialized structures and their role in biochemical homeostasis. As you study each system, you will be introduced to various technologies used to solve problems involving dysfunctions and disorders of each system. You will explore this question: How do the circulatory, immune, and excretory systems maintain life-sustaining internal equilibrium through matter and energy exchange?
By the end of this module you will have completed activities that are to be marked by your teacher and some that help to build confidence in your ability to understand, interpret, and express key course concepts. Everything should be saved in your course folder. At some point you may need to review pieces of information for exams, project work, or discussions.
For example, you will need to complete a unified response on a muscle disorder for your module project and will need to use information gathered throughout this module. When you are ready to complete the module project, you will find the project description in the Module Summary. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education