Module 7—The Digestive and Respiratory Systems
 Reflect and Connect
Can you imagine the journey of 54 hot dogs that were eaten in a few minutes?
© Steve Simzer/shutterstock
 Reflect on the Big Picture
Now that you know more about the details of digestion, build upon the analogy that your body is like a bank. Creating analogies can be a useful way of connecting something you don’t think about very often (digestion) to something you may use every day (the bank). 
 Going Beyond
As you have seen in Lesson 2, diet plays an important role in keeping people’s bodies in homeostasis. With such a wide range of foods and supplements available, it is easy to become confused about meeting proper nutritional needs.
This is where a trained registered dietitian (RD) can be very useful because an RD can provide information to you about food choices. RDs also assist in the development and promotion of consumer products as well as helping to manage food services in health institutions. A dietitian can be important to individuals even if they’re not elite athletes who push their bodies to extremes.
As an example, Kelly Anne Erdman is a registered dietitian for the Canadian Sport Centre in Calgary, the National Coaching Institute, and the University of Calgary Sport Medicine Centre. She was a member of the Canadian cycling team from 1985 to 1992 and was on the 1992 Canadian Olympic team as a cyclist.
Kelly Anne completed her Master of Science in Kinesiology Degree at the University of Calgary in 2004 while investigating dietary supplement usage and patterns among high-performance athletes. She provides nutritional information to top-level athletes in the hope that they will be at their peaks on competition day. The food and supplements that an athlete consumes can mean the split-second difference between a gold medal and last place.
Research the duties of a registered dietitian by searching for “Alberta Learning Information Services” on a web search.
Determine the answers to these questions.
Investigate the difference between a nutritionist and a dietitian.
Indicate where a dietitian may work.
Find out what requirements are needed to become a professionally qualified dietitian in Canada.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education