Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
 Reflect and Connect - Biofuel & Biogas
© André Klaassen/shutterstock
A. Background: Technology has advanced in the areas of biofuel and biogas. Without an understanding of anaerobic respiration, these technologies that benefit society would not exist. The products of anaerobic respiration would still be produced, but not used for the benefit of humans.
B. Questions: What development is being done on biofuel and biogas in Canada? What are some similarities and differences between biofuel and biogas?
C. Instructions: Use the Internet to research biofuel and biogas development in Canada. Investigate the similarities and differences between these substances.
Use the information gathered to answer your choice of one of the following:
Identify the raw material used to make biofuel and biogas. Identify alternative raw materials that can also be used to produce the same product.
Create a graphic that lists the steps used to produce biofuel and biogas. You can use diagrams from the Internet for ideas, and you can use clipart to help with diagrams, but do not copy flow charts off the Internet.
List possible uses for biofuel and biogas. 
Write the chemical formulas for biofuel and biogas. Explain the statement that biofuel and biogas still represent energy-rich compounds. Compare the chemical composition of each substance to carbon dioxide, which is the product of the complete oxidation of glucose.
What are some of the problems associated with the processes used to produce each of these substances?
NOTE: Charts can be a good way of comparing and contrasting. Since you are gathering and collecting information from a variety of sources, make certain to use your own words and identify the references you have used. 
D. Module 5: Lesson 5 Assignment:  Access the assignment sheet for this lesson to find the necessary work needed to complete this exercise. The link to this assignment is found at the beginning of lesson on the page for the "Lesson 5 Introduction". Upon completing the assignment, save the document into your course folder to submit at the end of the lesson to the proper dropbox for the instructor. Have a specific title and file name (EG: smithk_B20_m5_l5.rtf).
© Americo MARIANO/iStockphoto
 Reflect on the Big Picture
How has matter and energy been transferred through anaerobic respiration? Anaerobic respiration is linked to the carbon cycle. Glucose is used to generate ATP—the energy currency for the cell. ATP is required for all cells to perform metabolic functions that build, repair, digest, and create movement. A carbon- based gas or acid is a by-product of the oxidization of glucose.
The food, wine, and fuel industries have capitalized on the products created through anaerobic respiration. The need to explore alternative energy/fuel sources may encourage further development of respiration-related technologies.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education