Module 3—Ecosystems and Their Diversity
 Reflect and Connect
As you have seen, scientists have created a classification system that orders organisms on a broad spectrum. Through a series of observations, organisms can be identified as a species. You were introduced to the mnemonic device “Danish King Phillip Came Over For Green Spinach.” Mnemonic devices can be a useful tool for you to use in the future.
Create your own mnemonic to help you remember the order of the levels of classification.
 Discuss - Comparing Classification Systems
Note: Read, understand, be able to complete and discuss the concepts presented below. However, actually completing and submitting the work is an optional exercise in this lesson unless otherwise indicated by the instructor. If completed, share your work in the general discussion area for this module and/or add to the Module 3: Lesson 2 Assignment sheet and submit at the end of the lesson along with any additional lesson work.  
Concepts: How does the taxonomic classification system in Lesson 2 compare to the classification system in Lesson 1 (biosphere, biome, ecosystem, community, population, species)? How does this taxonomic naming system compare to other classification systems that libraries or chemists use? What are the purposes of other taxonomy systems?
 Reflect on the Big Picture
Parks Canada is responsible for ensuring proper ecological management of Canada’s national parks. This is critical as the popularity and numbers of visitors increase the pressures on these ecosystems.
© 2007 Jupiterimages Corporation
In Lesson 1 you discovered that maintaining ecological integrity is a priority for ecologists working in Canada’s national parks. Inventories of species present in each park are created and shared with other ecologists across the country.
In this Reflect on the Big Picture, examine the inventory, monitoring, and researching programs at Waterton Lakes National Park. You will find this information by accessing the Parks Canada website and using these search terms: “parks Canada waterton lakes.”  Once on the Waterton Lakes information page, use the navigation index to the left and choose “Park Management.”
Consider the following questions:
What research is being done and why?
How does the common naming system (binomial nomenclature) help with this research? 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education