Module 4—Mechanisms of Population Change
 Explore
 Read
A variety of evidence for evolution exists. This includes the following:
fossils
biogeography
anatomy
embryology
molecular biology and genetics
As you work through Lesson 3, each of the noted areas of evidence will be explained and explored in detail. Begin by watching the following animation as an introduction to the different types of evidence that exists for evolution.
 Read
Evidence for Evolution—Fossils
You have probably seen fossils like the ones in this photo. They are trilobites, and these organisms don’t exist today. Trilobite fossils can be found in Alberta and all over the world. Trilobites became extinct about 245 million years ago, but at one time there were more than 17 000 different species of them. The closest living relative to trilobites is likely the horseshoe crab.
© Ismael Montero /Dreamstime
© Jessica Fitzel/Dreamstime
strata: a layer of rock or soil that has a consistent character and is different from layers above and below it
Fossils appear in chronological order in the rock layers, or strata. Studying the order of the fossils can help determine their age. The order of the fossils can also help scientists organize evolutionary family trees. Fossils can help show the evolutionary lines between ancestors and living species.
 Self-Check
SC 1. Why is Archaeopteryx considered a transitional fossil?
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answer
SC 1. Archaeopteryx has characteristics of both reptiles (dinosaurs) and birds. It had feathers, but it also had teeth, claws, and a bony tail.
 Try This
Many movies portray prehistoric cave dwellers and dinosaurs living together. Was this really possible? Did birds evolve before or after fish? Use “Figure 4.10” on page 128 of the textbook to answer these questions. 
A common misconception is that humans and dinosaurs lived on Earth at the same time. Humans actually evolved over 55 million years after the dinosaurs became extinct! Dinosaurs fascinate children and adults alike. It is hard to imagine such different creatures roaming Earth.
 Self-Check
SC 2.  How many million years ago did South America and Africa break apart?
SC 3. When did India become part of Asia?
SC 4. Why are similar fossils of the reptile Cynognathus found in Africa and South America?
SC 5. Why are there no polar bears in Antarctica or penguins at the North Pole?
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 2. They broke apart from 110 to 120 million years ago.
SC 3. India became part of Asia from 23 to 30 million years ago.
SC 4. Africa and South America were once joined in one “supercontinent.”
SC 5. Antarctica and the North Pole were not connected when penguins and polar bears evolved.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education