Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
Lesson 6—Aerobic Respiration
 Get Focused
© Kevin Russ/iStockphoto
In Unit A you explored how the energy people get from food starts with solar energy. You should also understand that solar energy is stored as glucose through the process of photosynthesis. Plants do not produce starches and sugars just to feed animals—they use the compounds they produce for their own energy needs, such as growth, repair, and the completion of chemical reactions involved in other cellular processes.
However, plants do provide the energy and oxygen humans and other organisms need by storing complex carbohydrates and producing oxygen. The following chart shows some of the uses of energy.
Use of Energy
Explanation
Voluntary Actions
Motion
Organisms need energy to make their muscles contract. This allows them to walk, fight, make noise, and run.
Involuntary Actions
Breathing
Organisms need energy to contract muscles in and around their lungs to breathe.
Thinking
Organisms need energy to activate nerve cells in their brains.
Growth
Organisms use energy to make enzymes and to activate chemical reactions that build new cells. These new cells will result in growth.
Repair
Organisms use energy to repair or replace cells that are damaged.
Active Transport
Organisms need energy to transport materials throughout their cells and bodies.
Before riding a bike or being active in some other way, do you think about how the carbohydrates/sugars you consume and the oxygen that you breathe become part of the energy pathway that supports your activity?
In this lesson the following essential questions will be explored:
How does the presence of oxygen affect cellular respiration?
How does aerobic cellular respiration release potential energy from organic compounds?
NOTE: Proceed through the lesson in the order given while completing all the various exercises. They all help build important key concepts, review and/or may be applied in future lessons.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education