Module 3—Ecosystem Diversity 
In This Module
Lesson 1—Populations, Communities, and Ecosystems
If you were asked about the community you live in, you would probably describe the people and buildings in your neighbourhood. How would you describe the community found in the natural environment? In this lesson you will define terms used to describe ecosystems and take a look at some relationships that exist within ecosystems.
 How do biologists describe the relationships that exist between species, populations, communities, and ecosystems?
Lesson 2—Classifying and Naming Organisms
Would a rose by any other name really smell so sweet? How was the rose’s scientific classification into the family Rosaceae decided? In this lesson you will examine the classification system used by scientists to organize and name all living things. The title of this lesson refers to a common mnemonic device used for remembering levels of classification. 
 How are organisms classified and named?
Lesson 3—Classifying and Naming Organisms: Dichotomous Keys 
In this lesson you will learn to use and create your own dichotomous key as a tool for classifying objects and organisms. By learning how to use a dichotomous key, you will be able to answer the following question.
 How can observable characteristics be used to identify organisms at the genus species level?
Lesson 4—Studying Organisms in Ecosystems: Biomes, Habitats, and Niches
Like organisms, ecosystems are made up of specific parts. Each part depends on the interaction of biotic and abiotic factors. This lesson will explore biomes, habitats, and niches and will look at how each one is dependent on different abiotic and biotic factors.
 How do terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems support a diversity of organisms through a variety of habitats and niches?
 How do biotic and abiotic characteristics influence an aquatic and a terrestrial ecosystem? 
Lesson 5—Studying Organisms in Ecosystems: Limiting Factors
When you compare a tropical rainforest with the northern tundra, you likely assume correctly that more organisms are found in a tropical rainforest. Organisms are not evenly distributed across Earth’s surface. Their distribution is due to limiting factors that you will explore in this lesson.
 How do limiting factors influence the distribution and range of organisms? 
Lesson 6—Studying Organisms in Ecosystems: A Field Study
Finally, you get to go on a field trip.
 What can observations of biotic and abiotic factors gathered in a field study tell you about an ecosystem? 
 Module Assessment
The assessment for the content presented in this module will be based on a combination of:
1) each lessons assignment.
2) a selection of module projects.
3) a mid-term project.
4) a mid-term exam.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education