Module 2—Biosphere Equilibrium and the Impact of Humans 
 Big Picture
“Use what is happening in the Arctic—the Inuit Story—as a vehicle to reconnect us all, so that we may understand that the planet and its people are connected as one.”
—Sheila Watt-Cloutier, Canadian Inuit leader asking members of the US senate to consider how the Arctic is connected to the rest of the world in response to their refusal to sign the Kyoto Protocol (plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions)
When you watch television, listen to the radio, surf the Internet, or read magazines, you are often bombarded with information about climate change or global warming. All of the information in the media implies there is a direct link between greenhouse gases and climate change. Greenhouse gas emissions actually change the balance of energy and matter in the biosphere, which scientists propose is the cause of global warming.
Albertans contribute to greenhouse gas emissions: therefore, people in Alberta are connected to the balance of energy in the biosphere. Unfortunately, some of the effects of climate change are observed in our own “backyard”—the Canadian Arctic.
 © John Pitcher/iStockphoto
Are you aware that the Canadian Arctic, the biosphere’s air-conditioning unit, is seriously affected by global warming? Do you know that the ice shelves are melting at an alarming rate and that summers in the Arctic are lasting longer than ever before? Do you know that climate change may be negatively affecting polar bears?
You might be asking yourself, “Why should I care about longer summers, ice shelves, and polar bears?” Another question could be, “What’s the big deal about a few degrees of difference in Arctic temperatures?” Scientists believe that the fragile Arctic ecosystem serves as an early-warning system for the entire biosphere!
If one part of this ecosystem is affected, then all of the other systems must also be affected. Do you believe that “the planet and its people are connected as one”? Can you describe how you are connected? If people are all connected as one, then it must be assumed that all the actions taken will affect others—for good or for bad.
So this is the question for Module 2: What effects do humans have on biosphere equilibrium?
To know what effects humans have on biosphere equilibrium, you will need to work through these essential questions:
 How are energy, matter, and ecosystem productivity interrelated?
 How does the relationship between gas exchange in photosynthesis and cellular respiration influence the composition of the atmosphere?
 How do human activities influence the biosphere?
In addition to the lesson assignments and labs, there will be a Module Project to complete. You will be required to prepare a PowerPoint or a multimedia presentation, essay, speech, or storyboard exploring a specific example of how global warming is affecting the Arctic ecosystem in terms of energy and matter. 
When you are ready for more information about the project, go to the Module Summary and Assessment for instructions and a rubric identifying how your work will be marked.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education