Module 6—The Motor System and Homeostasis 
 Read
 © Andresr/shutterstock
The Value of Exercise
Read the following article from Health Canada. It accompanies “The Value of Exercise” on pages 347 to 348 in the textbook.
 The Benefits of Physical Activity
 Physical activity offers a range of benefits for all ages and abilities. The number links refer to a bibliography.
 For children/youth
 Physical activity is essential for healthy growth and development. Regular physical activity in childhood develops cardiovascular fitness, strength, flexibility and bone density 1. For example 35-40% of a person's total bone mass is laid down in four years of adolescence 2.
 Physical activity helps maintain a healthy body weight, and is associated with positive self-esteem, greater self-efficacy, improved academic and cognitive performance, and greater perceived well-being. Physical activity helps reduce a number of risk factors for diseases such as coronary heart disease by setting positive habits early on in childhood and adolescence. Young people who are physically active are less likely to use tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs 3.
 For adults
 Regular physical activity and higher levels of fitness allow daily tasks to be accomplished with greater ease and comfort and with less fatigue. Functional decline with advancing age is no longer accepted so lightly as research shows that as much as one half of the decline between the ages of 30 and 70 is due not to aging itself but to an inactive way of life 5.
 There is a positive relationship between workplace physical activity programs and job satisfaction. Higher job satisfaction, in turn, can lead to better employee morale, increased productivity, and reduced absenteeism 6.
 Leisure-time physical activity provides a balance to the demands of family and work . . . 4 
 Active individuals typically report improvement in energy levels, job attitude, and overall morale 7.
 The Canada Life Assurance Company study noted an increase in productivity in fitness program participants compared to their inactive colleagues. Workplace physical activity programs reduce absenteeism due to illness, injury, and stress 8.
 Workplace physical activity policies and programs can improve:
 Coping abilities for stress
 Fitness & health
 Morale
 General work performance
 Job satisfaction
 Organizational effectiveness
 Productivity
 Programs can also reduce: 
 Absenteeism
 Injuries & accidents
 Turnover
 Disability/compensation costs
 Health care costs
 Life insurance costs
 For seniors
 Weight-bearing physical activity reduces the rate of bone loss associated with osteoporosis. Regular physical activity maintains strength and flexibility, and balance and coordination, and can help reduce the risk of falls—a real worry for the elderly 9.
 Increasing age is associated with increased limitation in the ability to carry out basic activities of daily living. A significant portion of the decline in functional capacity associated with aging is due to physical inactivity 10.
 In short, physical activity helps prolong good health and independence. 
 For individuals with a disability
 The active living movement removes the yardstick in comparing one person to another. It lets people set their own standards, and reap the social, emotional, spiritual and physical benefits of choosing their own activities. Active living helps make coping with the everyday challenges of life easier, and can even prevent relapses of certain disabilities. It can also increase the energy a person has to deal with the physical and mental stresses of a disability.
 From a health perspective, active living increases mobility, improves posture, and reduces aches and pains that can accompany long periods of sitting. Better circulation reduces the possibility of blood-pooling and swelling in the legs. And maintenance of a healthy weight helps those who use aids to get around more easily.
 For the environment
 Active living protects and promotes a healthy environment by encouraging Canadians to participate in outdoor activities like walking, cycling and gardening. Environmental benefits are achieved when Canadians choose active modes of transportation such as walking, cycling or in-line skating rather than using their cars for a few more trips per week. Therefore, active living can contribute to decreasing air pollution.
 Through active outdoor physical activities (walking, gardening and cycling), Canadians not only improve their health but also help the environment 11.
As you have read, there are many benefits to physical activity and exercise. Exercise programs are valuable throughout life, no matter what your age or ability. Exercise can also take many forms—it need not only be traditional activities such as running, aerobics, or lifting weights. Beneficial physical activity can include everything from yoga, tai chi, cycling, swimming, or even walking to the nearby store to get that carton of milk instead of taking the car.
 Try This
TR 3. Designing an Exercise Plan
It is now your task to put together a daily week-long, 30-minute exercise plan that you could perform and that would appeal to a student in high school. Include a variety of activities in your plan, and indicate the time allotted for each activity. For each activity, be specific as to what the activity involves and outline its physiological benefits.
Once you have developed your routine, suggest why you think your program might lure a teenager off the couch and into a healthier lifestyle. Before you begin deciding on your exercise plan, research the requirements of a good physical activity routine. You may want to read “Canada’s Physical Activity Guide to Healthy Active Living” before you begin. You can find this guide in a web search.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education