Module 8—Circulation, Immunity, and Excretion 
 Lesson Summary
In this lesson you explored the following questions:
 How do the kidneys contribute to homeostasis in terms of water and ions?
 How does the design of the kidney relate to dialysis technologies?
The kidneys maintain the water-salt balance in the body. Water balance is maintained when the body senses osmotic pressure via osmoreceptors. High or low pressures stimulate or inhibit the release of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). ADH causes the collecting ducts and distal tubules to become more permeable to water, thereby helping the body to conserve water when necessary.
Another hormone, aldosterone, regulates the amount of salt in the body by reabsorbing sodium ions. Aldosterone increases the permeability of the collecting duct and distal tubules for Na+. You discovered that urinalysis can be used as a tool to determine health conditions. Dialysis was presented to you as a treatment for kidney failure. Blood is filtered using principles of diffusion either internally (using your intestine) or externally (being hooked up to a machine).
Now that you are at the end of this module, you will complete your Module 8 project. For the module project you will have the choice between three extended responses. The purpose of an extended response is to help you take a closer look at a specific area of study. In the module project you will choose between investigating the heart, an immune response, or a disease of the kidney. You will find further information in your Module Summary.
Lesson Glossary
aldosterone: a hormone that causes the tubules of the kidneys to retain sodium and water
This increases the volume of fluid in the body, and drives up the blood pressure.
antidiuretic hormone: a hormone in all mammals that stimulates increased water reabsorption by the kidneys; also called vasopressin
dehydration: a relative deficiency of water molecules in relation to other dissolved solutes; can be caused by blood loss, vomiting, excess exertion, or malnutrition
diabetes insipidus: a condition characterized by the excretion of large amounts of severely diluted urine, which cannot be reduced when fluid intake is reduced
It denotes an inability of the kidney to concentrate urine. DI is caused by a deficiency of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also known as vasopressin.
hypothalamus: a gland located above the brain stem and connects the nervous system with the endocrine system by relaying messages to the pituitary gland; it is the size of an almond
osmoreceptors: a sensor found in the hypothalamus of the brain that detects changes in osmotic pressure 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education