Module 8—Circulation, Immunity, and Excretion 
In This Module
Lesson 1—Structures of the Circulatory System
Pumps, valves, and pipes sound very mechanical. However, the organic version of pipes, pumps, and valves are what the human body depends on for the transport of blood, nutrients, and wastes.
 What are the major structures and functions of the circulatory system?
 How do the principal structures of the circulatory system move blood through the body?
Lesson 2—Investigating the Circulatory System
Heart rate and blood pressure are two easily measured vital statistics. These measurements are related to your overall physical health. Sometimes people experience problems with their circulatory system, which weakens their overall health. Technology has been developed to help deal with such problems.
 What is the relationship between the heart rate, blood pressure, and exercise?
 How can technology treat disorders of the circulatory system?
Lesson 3—Blood
Water is an essential component of the biosphere. Meanwhile, blood is an essential component of the human body. Blood is a fluid suspension as well as a solvent. Each part of the suspension serves a purpose while substances dissolve into blood to be transported, similar to the role of water in the biosphere. Blood also regulates body temperature based on the property of water that allows water to also regulate climate (specific heat capacity) and the heat exchange system that is installed in all humans.
 What are the main components of blood? How do these components contribute to transporting, clotting, and resisting the influence of pathogens?
 How does blood help to regulate body temperature?
Lesson 4—Circulation 
A complex network of piping moves water through the different processes of water treatment. The movement of water is dependent on pressure and concentration gradients. In humans, billions of capillaries deliver nutrients and remove wastes based on pressure and concentration gradients. 
 At the capillary level, how does the circulatory system aid the digestive, excretory, respiratory, and motor systems’ exchange of matter with the environment?
Lesson 5—The Lymphatic System and Immunity
How does your body try to guard you from illness? Sometimes you do get sick. However, considering the millions of bacteria and viruses that you come into contact with on a daily basis, your body does a relatively good job of warding off serious infection.
 What is the function of the lymphatic system?
 How do the cellular and non-cellular components of the human defense system work together to maintain homeostasis?
Lesson 6—Blood Types and Rh Factors
What’s your type? Understanding that not all blood is the same is important in case of an emergency where you may require a blood donation. There are specific reasons why your body won’t accept blood from just anyone.
 How do antigens identify blood types and Rh factors?
Lesson 7—Structures and Functions of the Excretory System 
Why do people urinate? This lesson is an introduction to the structures involved in urination as well as an introduction to the structures that coordinate the complex filtration of blood and maintain fluid and salt levels.
 What are the principal structures of the excretory system, and how do they function?
 How do nephrons contribute to the function of the excretory system?
Lesson 8—Urine Formation in the Nephron
Urine is formed by the body as a way to maintain homeostasis. Wastes are released in urine and the kidneys ensure that proper levels of solutes are present in the blood plasma. 
 How does the nephron function in maintaining the composition of blood plasma?
 How do the kidneys function in excreting metabolic wastes and expelling them into the environment? 
Lesson 9—Maintaining the Excretory System 
The main role of the excretory system is to filter nutrients from waste, reabsorb water, and maintain critical electrolyte levels. Sometimes kidneys become damaged and people may need to undergo dialysis to filter their blood.
 How do the kidneys contribute to homeostasis in terms of water and ions?
 How does the design of the kidney relate to dialysis technologies?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education