Unit B Introduction
In Unit A you investigated how humans are affecting the exchange of energy and matter cycles in the biosphere. You looked at how important it is for equilibrium to exist between matter and energy exchange. You also explored how humans have disrupted this fine balance and helped cause global warming and other ecological impacts.
Unit B—Ecosystems and Population Change, could be somewhat dry. So let’s make this all about you—one person on a very large planet.  Considering that you not only live in an ecosystem, are part of a population, have an effect on ecosystems and other populations and that you evolved from Neanderthals, this is a fascinating story. This unit will also explore how humans can disrupt the environment. But you will also see how humans are trying to preserve the environment.
There are two modules in this unit. Module 3 will help you classify parts of ecosystems and types of ecosystems. You will look at how to classify organisms and how to classify certain components of ecosystems as being unique to land or water. And you will classify the interactions between different parts of an ecosystem.
As you work through Unit B, you will realize the importance of preserving the environment as you investigate the interactions of organisms with each other and their environments. You will practise using the tools of science to study organisms and their interactions (Think of yourself as a field ecologist.) You will also examine the environments that organisms inhabit and how changes to these environments affect populations immediately and over long periods of time.
In Module 4 of the unit you will explore how evolution occurs and explore what evidence there is for organisms changing over time. So, while the title may not inspire you immediately, there really are some interesting ideas to consider.
For example, Why isn’t there a tropical rainforest in Alberta? Why do giraffes have long necks? Are people more similar to pigs than apes? Are there new species out there? At the end of this unit you should be able to answer these questions. 
Specifically, however, you should be able to 
 describe how the biosphere is composed of ecosystems, each with distinctive biotic and abiotic characteristics
 explain the mechanisms involved in the change of population over time 
As you work through the two modules of Unit B, there will be Self- Checks, Try This assignments, labs, and discussions. There will be lesson assignments, which will be indicated at the beginning of each lesson and clearly identified throughout the lesson. As well, there will be module assessments. All course work that you complete, whether it is for assessment or not, should be saved in your course folder—think of it as your binder.
Once you have completed this unit your assessment will involve creating concept maps, answering unit review questions from your textbook, and developing a report on the ecology and predicted evolution of a species.
When you are ready to begin the unit assessment, go to the Unit B Assessment section of the course for instructions. There will be marking guides available for you to see how you will be marked. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education