Module 8—Circulation, Immunity, and Excretion
 Read
The Rh System
Rh factor: a group of antigens found in most red blood cells; people with Rh antigen on their blood cells are Rh+
In addition to the ABO blood-typing system, the presence or absence of the Rh factor (antigen) determines if an individual is Rh positive or Rh negative. An Rh+ individual has the Rh antigen on his or her blood cells, while an Rh- individual will lack Rh antigens. The Rh system was named after the rhesus monkey, since these monkeys were used to research blood typing.
A problem can arise if Rh- individuals are exposed to Rh+ blood. This typically happens when a pregnant woman (Rh-) gives birth to a baby who carries the Rh antigen because blood often mixes during childbirth. Once the mother is exposed to Rh+ blood, her body will identify this blood as a foreign substance and create Rh+ antibodies.
In possible subsequent pregnancies, where a baby is again Rh+, the mother’s antibodies may cross the placenta and endanger the child. A condition referred to as hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) can occur.
The Rh+ antibodies from the mother will begin destroying the baby’s blood cells and can lead to brain damage, deafness, and death. A series of diagrams on page 297 of the textbook illustrates and explains the mechanism of Rh incompatibility.
 Self-Check
Use the following information to answer the next two questions.
ABO Blood Type System and The RH System
Individual
Antigen on Red Blood Cells
Antibodies in Plasma
Rh factor
A
A and B
none
Rh+
B
none
A and B
Rh-
C
A
anti-B
Rh+
D
B
anti-A
Rh-
SC 2. Which individual in the chart above would have Type O negative blood?
Individual A
Individual B
Individual C
Individual D
SC 3.  All of the individuals identified in the chart above are females, all had previous pregnancies with men who are Rh+, and all become pregnant a second time. Which individuals in the chart would have to be concerned about hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN)?
Individuals A and C
Individuals A and B
Individuals B and D
Individuals C and D
Check your work.
Self-Check Answers
SC 2. B
SC 3. C
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education