Module 7—The Digestive and Respiratory Systems
Module Introduction
The major concepts developed in this module will lead your exploration of the role of the digestive and respiratory systems in maintaining homeostasis in humans through the exchange of energy and matter with the environment. You will look at some of the physical and biochemical processes used by these systems and will see how they assist in maintaining metabolic equilibrium in the body.
You will also examine the conditions that result when the digestive and respiratory structures do not function properly and diseases may interfere with body functions. What happens to your respiratory system if your digestive system fails to work properly?
As well, you will see what technology is available to treat and prevent disorders related to the respiratory and digestive systems. Medical technology is based on the scientific knowledge connected with their treatments. This module builds on your knowledge and understanding from Science 8 and Science 10 and from Units A to C of this course. As discussed in Module 6, these systems are involuntary and are controlled by smooth muscle contractions. You will apply your knowledge of cellular respiration, energy exchange, the structure and function of animal cells, and the cycling of matter in living systems.
You already know that oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged when you breathe. And you know that the digestive system involves the breakdown of all that you eat. You may be familiar with the principal structures of each system, but perhaps you don’t specifically understand how each one works. As you work through this module, you will identify structures and functions through observations. You will explore technological advances that have been created to treat or prevent conditions that disrupt homeostasis within the human system.
As you work through this module, consider the following question: How do the human digestive and respiratory systems exchange matter and energy with the environment?
By the end of this module, you will have completed activities to be marked by your instructor and some activities designed to build confidence in your ability to understand, interpret, and express key course concepts. Everything should be saved in your course folder. At some point, you may need to review pieces of information for exams, project work, or discussions. For example, you will need to complete a unified response on a muscle disorder for your module project and will need to use information gathered throughout this module.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education