Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
In This Module
Lesson 1—Energy for Life
You already know that every organism in the biosphere requires energy. This lesson will build on what you already know about photosynthesis. You will also explore how some organisms capture and store chemical energy rather than light energy. In order to better understand the capture and storage of energy, as well as its release, you will explore the relationship between the processes of photosynthesis, chemosynthesis, and cellular respiration.
What processes do producers use to harness energy?
How is energy distributed through the biosphere?
Lesson 2—Energy Flow Through Trophic Levels and the Cycling of Matter
This lesson will examine how energy is transferred from one organism to another within an ecosystem. To do this, you will study the flow of energy between producers and consumers. You will see that the flow of energy can be compared to the links in a chain. You will also find out how much energy is actually available from one trophic level to another within a food chain.
How can you model the transfer of energy and matter between organisms?
How can you use math to explain the differences in energy flow in various ecosystem food chains?
Lesson 3—Two Hydrogens and an Oxygen:  One Small Molecule, One BIG Role
Water is a key player in the dynamic balance of the biosphere. This lesson looks at the importance of water to the biosphere, especially to biogeochemical cycles (that’s just a big word for “chemicals of the living Earth”).
What chemical and physical properties of water make water an important part of biogeochemical cycles?
Lesson 4—Cycling of Matter
What matter matters? Carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus are substances that matter. Since there is a finite supply of these chemicals, they must be cycled or the supply will run out. This lesson looks at the cycling of these substances and provides you with the opportunity to discover exactly how important these molecules are to you.
How do carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus cycle through the biosphere?
Lesson 5—Biodiversity and Biomagnification
 Once you look at how energy flows and matter cycles, it would be a good idea to relate that to biodiversity and biomagnification. Both are affected by the distribution of energy and matter. By looking at these two concepts you will be better able to explain the equilibrium that can exist in the biosphere.
How do biodiversity and biomagnification relate to energy flow and the cycling of matter?
Once you have completed these lessons you will complete a module project. Once the project is complete you will move on to Module 2, which looks at the fine balance of energy and matter and how human actions can create imbalances that can eventually reach global proportions.
 Module Assessment
The assessment for the content presented in this module will be based on a combination of: 1) lesson assignments2) a mid-term project (bonus)3) a mid-term exam
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education