Module 8—Circulation, Immunity, and Excretion
 Module Summary
In this module you explored circulation, immunity, and excretion. The Big Picture connected these three body systems with the functioning of a water treatment plant. You explored the circulatory system in the first four lessons. Like a water treatment plant, the mechanics of a circulatory system include pumps, valves, tubing, and fluids. The primary structures of the circulatory system are the heart, veins, arteries, capillaries, and blood. 
As you worked through each lesson you discovered how blood moves through the body, technologies related to the circulatory system, the components of blood, and how the circulatory system exchanges matter and energy with the environment. 
By participating in a virtual dissection of a sheep’s heart, you were able to identify structures of the heart and map the flow of blood of pulmonary and systemic circulation. You explored the components and function of components in the blood—hemoglobin, plasma, and platelets. 
Blood is a multifaceted component of your circulatory system that transports nutrients, gases, and wastes, contains cells for immunity, and has the ability to clot if you are injured. Energy flow is also maintained via the circulatory system. The ability for blood to absorb heat and the design of your network of blood vessels allows heat to be transferred or conserved in order to maintain body temperature. You also explored the importance of blood pressure as a mechanism to control the exchange of matter and as a measure of health. 
In Lessons 5 and 6 you explored how your body deals with invading pathogens. As a water treatment plant removes harmful substances from tap water, your immune system also destroys harmful substances. You further explored the role of blood in immunity and you were introduced to the lymphatic system. Your body has three lines of defence against invading pathogens: physical/chemical barriers, cell-mediated response, and antibody mediated response. 
Through a virtual blood typing activity, you discovered that blood type is dependent on antigens and antibodies. The wrong type of blood transfusion would create an immune response. 
In the remaining lessons of this module you explored the excretory system. This is your body’s filtration system. Before tap water ends up in your glass, water has undergone several filtration processes to remove waste. Similarly, as blood cycles through your body, it is continually filtered by the kidneys. You studied the major structures of the kidney by following a virtual kidney dissection. 
The nephrons were a major focus of the excretory system. As you investigated the structures of the kidney, you also examined how the nephrons regulate homeostasis by maintaining blood composition and ridding the body of wastes. You specifically looked at three processes occurring in successive portions of the nephron that form the waste products of urine: filtration, reabsorption, and secretion. 
Lastly, you explored the role of the kidneys in maintaining the water-salt balance in the body. Via hormones, aldosterone, and ADH, electrolytes and osmotic pressure are controlled. Altering the permeability of the nephron to water and sodium ions helps to maintain homeostasis. You explored how urinalysis can be used to diagnose conditions such as diabetes mellitus. Technology, such as dialysis, has been developed to help people with kidney disorders. This technology mimics the filtration of blood across a semi-permeable membrane. 
Each of the three systems studied in this module is dependent on the other ones. Without blood, the kidneys would have nothing to filter, the heart would have nothing to pump, and you would have no immunity. You would cease to exist as a living human being. 
Without a heart, blood could not circulate, would not be filtered by the kidneys, would not be able to find pathogens, and would not transfer nutrients or gases. You would cease to exist. 
Without kidneys your blood would remain unfiltered, and toxins would build up and inhibit the function of cells in the heart. You would cease to exist. There is a definite pattern. Homeostasis in your body hinges on the interdependence and health of all body systems. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education