Unit C Introduction
In Unit A you investigated how energy enters the biosphere and how it flows through the biosphere. You were introduced to photosynthesis and cellular respiration, but not in great detail. In Unit B you looked at ecosystems and population change.
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are essential processes in all ecosystems. Depending on the ecosystem, organisms can adapt these processes through natural selection for abiotic and biotic factors. Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are cellular processes that can be considered evidence of evolution. In Unit C you will explore the intricate pathways followed by the processes of photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are two processes essential to your existence. If plants could not perform photosynthesis, you would have no food or oxygen to breathe. Without cellular respiration, your body would not be able to use any of the stored energy in food and your cells would not function. It would be as if your gas tank was full, but your engine didn’t work.
The life processes of photosynthesis and cellular respiration allow for the transfer of energy and matter. This unit will take a closer look at the pathways involved in energy transfer and the resulting intermediate products.
How do energy conversions in living systems maintain energy flow in the biosphere? In their application of technologies, how do people affect photosynthesis and cellular respiration? These are questions you should consider as you work through Unit C.
This unit consists of one module. This module will explain how photosynthesis stores energy in organic compounds, such as sugars, and how cellular respiration releases potential energy from organic compounds.
Specifically, you will be able to 
 describe how photosynthesis enables the conversion of light energy into chemical potential energy within organic compounds
 explain the role of cellular respiration in releasing potential energy from organic compounds for use by organisms
 understand the complexities and importance of photosynthesis and cell respiration in the biosphere  
As you work through this unit and its module, you will find Self-Check questions, Try This assignments, labs, and discussions. There will be lesson assignments indicated at the beginning of each lesson and then clearly identified throughout the lesson. All of the course work that you complete, whether it is for assessment or not, should be saved in your course folder. Think of the course folder as your binder for storing course materials and review notes.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education