Module 4—Mechanisms of Population Change
 Reflect and Connect
© Mati Dovner/shutterstock
Comedians have been heard to ponder why, in the years after nuclear or chemical disasters, we still don’t have any superheroes.  We also have movies, books, and graphic novels filled with the ideas that ordinary people can be transformed into the extraordinary though some kind of alteration or mutation process, producing some kind of “superspecies” of human.   But what conditions would need to be present for an ordinary Peter Parker type to become Spiderman or a new species?  What would the process actually have to be like in order to be viable at all?  Outline a scenario in storytelling format (cartoon, creative writing piece, video, audio) that would describe how the “spiderman” (or some other form of superhuman) species could evolve from the current population of humans. Be creative but don’t get carried away; this is to be a short piece.  The goal ultimately is to demonstrate that you understand the true mechanisms of speciation. 
OR
Create your own scenario outlining the evolution of a new species (it does not have to be human) using a storytelling format of your choice.  Again, the goal ultimately is to demonstrate that you understand the true mechanisms of speciation.  
 Going Beyond
The fossil record indicates that humans have changed over time. The documentary titled “Becoming Human” explores the evidence for human evolution, anatomical differences between modern-day humans and their ancestors, human lineages, and cultural evolution. You will travel with paleontologists across continents, visit dig sites, and look at ancient fossils of early humans.
As you view the documentary, pay attention to the changes in structure and culture that make people what they are today. To access this video, type in the keywords “becoming human documentary” into your Internet search.
This website has lots of information that is interesting and worthwhile to view.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education