Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
Module Introduction
The major concepts developed in this module will lead your exploration of the cellular processes of photosynthesis and cellular respiration. These two processes provide the energy and matter required for the survival of all organisms on Earth. You will relate photosynthesis to the storage of energy in organic compounds. You will also explore the role of cellular respiration in releasing potential energy from organic compounds. You will be drawing on what you have already learned about these processes and the cell structures involved from Science 7, 8, and 10. You will also build upon the concept of energy flow and matter exchange that was developed in Unit A. In this module, instead of looking at an entire ecosystem or biosphere, you will be looking at the starting point of energy and matter exchange at the cellular level.
How does photosynthesis absorb solar energy? Photosynthesis will be broken down into more complex reactions. You will learn how pigments are involved in energy absorption. You will explore how compounds gain and lose electrons in the process of energy transfer to provide energy for photosynthesis and for the production of glucose.
How do organisms harness the energy from photosynthesis? You will investigate different kinds of cellular respiration. You will again explore how compounds gain and lose electrons during this process.
Lessons in this module will guide your discovery of the application of technology to benefit humans. You will also look at how humans may have unintentionally impacted photosynthesis and cellular respiration.
By the end of this module you will have completed activities that are to be marked by your teacher and others that help to build confidence in your ability to understand, interpret, and express key course concepts. Everything should be saved in your course folder so that you are able to review pieces of information for exams, unit assessments, or discussions.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education