Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
How Energy Flows Through Consumers
 Read 
Now you will be taking a close look at consumers. Read pages 13 to 15 in your textbook, starting at “A Closer Look at Consumers.” Continue reading to “Section 1.1 Summary” on page 14. Make note of the different ways to classify consumers. Save the notes for later review.
 Self-Check
SC 4. Do questions 6, 7, and 8 on page 15 of your textbook.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 4.
The first law of thermodynamics states that energy cannot be created or destroyed, but it can be transformed from one form to another, or passed from one object to another. The second law of thermodynamics states that with each energy conversion, there is less energy to do useful work, because some energy is converted into a form that organisms cannot use, such as heat.
The albedo of fresh snow is 80 to 90 percent, while the albedo of water is 25 percent or less. (See page 11 of the textbook.) Forests and grasses have even lower albedo values (7 to 18 percent and 18 to 25 percent, respectively). With the loss of snow and ice cover, which both have high albedos, more of Earth’s surface will have a low albedo. As the albedo of Earth’s surface decreases, less incoming radiant energy from the Sun is reflected by the Earth’s surface. More radiant energy is absorbed, further warming the planet and reducing snow and ice cover.
As the skunk cabbage carries out cellular respiration and other reactions, it transfers energy to the environment as dissipated heat, which melts the snow.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 5. The second law of thermodynamics is represented by the loss of heat at every level. There is less and less energy available after each conversion.
 Reflect and Connect
Draw a diagram (by hand or by computer) or write a paragraph describing what you know about the flow of energy through the biosphere. Make sure that your diagram or paragraph represents each of the summary points from pages 14 and 15 of your textbook. Your diagram or paragraph is a work in progress and will be modified once you complete Lesson 2. Complete your work and save it into your notes.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education