Module 3—Ecosystem Diversity
 Explore
Scientists have divided the aquatic environments on Earth into two categories: marine and fresh water. Perform a websearch to find out information about aquatic biomes. Complete ONE of the following activities.
Choose six aquatic biomes that you discovered in your research in Watch and Listen. Identify each aquatic biome as either marine or fresh water, and find a picture or create a diagram to represent the biome. Organize this information using a visual organizer.
OR
List the five marine zones that you discovered in your research in Watch and Listen. Find pictures of species that would live in each of these zones. How have the organisms adapted to the specific abiotic factor in each zone? Organize this information using a visual organizer.
 Read
Starting on page 95 of the textbook, read the section called “Habitats.”  Continue by reading about “Ecological Niche” and “Habitats and Niches within Ecosystems” on pages 97 and 98.
habitat: a place or area with a particular set of characteristics, both biotic and abiotic, in which an organism lives and can survive
range: a geographical area in which a population or species is found
niche: a place occupied by a species in its ecosystem and its role
All organisms require specific abiotic factors in order to survive. For example, most animals can’t survive if the temperature is above 45°C. But some bacteria are found living in hot springs with temperatures greater than 100°C. These required abiotic and biotic factors determine a species’ habitat. The location of these habitats will determine a species’ range. An organism living in its habitat has a role to play—it has certain biotic and abiotic needs in order to survive. This is called the organism’s niche.
 Self-Check
SC 6. How could you describe your niche?
SC 7. Why can many different organisms live in the same habitat?
SC 8.  An observed species of animal has a very restricted diet; it eats only two types of plants. Explain why this species may have a higher probability of becoming endangered than a species that eats ten species of plants.
SC 9. Give an example of a niche in an aquatic ecosystem and a niche in a terrestrial ecosystem.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 6. Your niche might be going to school, working part-time, looking after younger siblings, shopping for clothes, eating fruits and vegetables, or drinking water.
SC 7. Many organisms can share habitats because they have different niches.
SC 8. Because the animal’s niche (role and resource requirements) is smaller, it would be greatly affected by one or both food sources disappearing. It would have a limited range due to having a less diverse diet.
SC 9. A niche in an aquatic ecosystem could be the photosynthetic organisms which inhabit the surface of the water or animals that crawl on the bottom sediments. A niche in a terrestrial ecosystem could be spruce trees that grow in sandy soils—these trees provide food and habitats for different animals.
 Watch and Listen
As you watch the video titled "Life Under the Sea" think about the ecological niche of the species in the marine ecosystem. What biotic and abiotic requirements do the species have? There are many species living in this same habitat, but each species has its own niche or role in the ecosystem. The niches may overlap but will not be the same. You will use this video to help answer Part B of Try This.
 Try This 1 - Comparing Biomes and Niches
Instructions:  Complete and TR1 - Part B.
TR1 - Part B: Comparing Niches - The ecological niches of two species selected from the “Survival in the Sea” video will be compared and contrasted. A Venn Diagram will be used in the process. The details of the requirements are on the Module 3: Lesson 4 Assignment. Possible Extension: Can you fit a third species into your Venn diagram? If so, include this in the work.
species richness: a number of species
abundance: a number of individual birds
stand: a group of forest trees of uniform species, composition, age, and health
Complete this Thought Lab, which is found on page 99 of the textbook. This study compares species richness and abundance in pure and mixed stands of trees. You will attempt to answer this question: How will communities of birds vary between a forest dominated by one tree species and a forest with a variety of tree species?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education