Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
Lesson 3—The Light-Independent Reactions of Photosynthesis
 Get Focused
© Andreas Meyer/shutterstock
What if humans decide to colonize space? How could they apply information about photosynthesis to make colonization sustainable? In Lesson 2 you investigated how energy was converted during photosynthesis. You also know that plants absorb carbon dioxide and use it to make sugar.
In Lesson 3 you will study how plants are able to produce biomass.
“An estimated 170 billion tons of dry plant biomass is produced through photosynthesis by all plants on Earth each year. For every dry ton of new plant biomass produced through photosynthesis, approximately 1273 kg of oxygen are added to the atmosphere and approximately 1636 kg of carbon dioxide are removed. Studies conducted by the US and Russian space agencies show that astronauts consume approximately 0.9 kg of oxygen and exhale approximately 1.1 kg of carbon dioxide every 24 h. Based on this data, approximately 0.64 kg of new dry plant material must be produced by photosynthesis each day to supply the oxygen needs of one adult.”
Dr. B. C. Wolverton
Knowing how much plant matter is needed to produce enough oxygen to support life is valuable information. The values for oxygen production and carbon dioxide use stated in the previous quotation could be very helpful for scientists trying to design efficient crops or gardens able to sustain life in a space colony. Since the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis require carbon dioxide and produce biomass, this information is of great interest to researchers.
You may have noticed from the name of this process that light does not appear to be necessary. Does this mean that this series of reactions could happen without sunlight? As you work through this lesson, consider the necessary reactants for this step to occur and determine if they will be available to plants in space.
In this lesson the following essential questions will be examined:
How is carbon dioxide used during the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis?
How are ATP and NADPH produced by the light-dependent reactions used to make glucose?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education