Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
 Read
Plant Productivity and Types of Photosynthesis
In Module 2: Lesson 1 you were introduced to productivity. Plant productivity can be related to biomass. Biomass is produced by photosynthesis and is measured in units of dry organic matter (kg/m2/ yr). The higher the biomass, the greater the productivity. When farmers talk about crop yields, they are hoping for high levels of plant productivity. Plant productivity is directly related to the metabolic process of photosynthesis.
The ability for farms and orchards to produce large amounts of food is of great importance to people. In 2008, it was reported that there may be a global food-shortage crisis. There is not enough food, such as wheat and corn, being stored or grown to support both human consumption and biofuel production. Booming populations and a switch to meat-rich diets in the developing world have increased the demand for wheat and rice.
How can photosynthesis-related technologies help this potential crisis?
 Self-Check
SC 2. Complete this phrase: Productivity and sustainability are influenced by______________. Perform a web search with the keywords “sustainability plant productivity grasslands.”
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answer
SC 2. Productivity and sustainability are influenced by biodiversity.
Studies suggest that species richness, in producers and consumers, maintains a sustainable environment. Jot down some of your ideas about the effect of biodiversity on plant productivity and photosynthesis. Save your ideas in your course folder. It is beneficial to review past topics and apply them to new information.
 Watch and Listen
In Module 2: Reflect on the Big Picture, you were asked to create a list of technologies related to photosynthesis. You may have explored biofuels, agriculture, greenhouse gas reduction, and hydrogen gas production. But you may not have considered herbicides as a technology related to photosynthesis. Watch the video of the effects of herbicides on a plant. Since many herbicides interfere with the process of photosynthesis, they are considered to be metabolic toxins. You will be taking a closer look at metabolic toxins in Lesson 7.
Kelly Goedde, Tom Bauman, Case Medlin, Glenn Nice, Bill Johnson, Purdue University
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education