Unit A Introduction
What is the importance of balancing energy flow and the cycles of matter in maintaining equilibrium with the biosphere? What happens when humanity intentionally or unintentionally affects this balance? These are questions you should consider as you work through Unit A.
Earth’s source of energy from the Sun is infinite, as far as is known. This energy flows through the biosphere and constantly transfers from producers to consumers. Matter, such as carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus, is finite and, therefore, needs to cycle or the supply of matter will run out. Humans are one animal species involved in these processes that have a great impact on the flow of energy and the cycling of matter. Human influence on balance in the biosphere can be positive (e.g., a helpful technology) or negative (e.g., pollution) and intentional or unintentional. 
In Unit A you will focus on how energy is transferred within the biosphere and how energy is related to the cycling of matter in the biosphere. You will examine how the constant flow of energy and cycling of matter in the biosphere leads to a state of equilibrium or homeostasis. You will also study why it is important for the biosphere to remain in a state of equilibrium. And you will also investigate the ecological impact of human activities on the exchange of energy and matter in the biosphere. 
There are two modules in this unit. Module 1 investigates how energy flows through the biosphere and how energy affects the biogeochemical cycling that takes place in the biosphere. You will explore energy flow and the cycling of matter, and you will discover how these processes work to maintain biosphere equilibrium. Module 2 will focus on the impacts of humans on biosphere equilibrium. 
Together, these modules will explain how the exchange of energy and matter are essential to maintaining equilibrium in the biosphere and how human activity can disrupt that equilibrium. 
Specifically, you will be able to  
 explain how the biosphere is maintained by a constant flow of energy 
 describe the cycling of matter through the biosphere and how cycling perpetuates the biosphere’s steady state of equilibrium 
 explain how the balance of energy and matter exchange in the biosphere maintains its steady state of equilibrium 
As you work through the two modules of this unit, you will find Self-Check questions, Try This assignments, labs, and discussions. There will be lesson assignments, which will be indicated at the beginning of each lesson and then clearly identified throughout the lesson. There will also be module assignments. All of the course work that you complete, whether it is for assessment or not, should be saved in your course folder. Think of the course folder as your binder for storing course materials and review notes. 
Once you have completed this unit, you will write a response that offers the opportunity to practice responding to diploma exam questions. Perhaps you will choose not to take Biology 30; however, learning how to answer diploma exam questions is a practical skill that can be applied to other science diploma courses. In this unit you will be asked to consider the consequences of human activity on biosphere equilibrium. To respond to this question, you will have to explore the processes of energy flow and matter exchange and predict the outcomes based on what you have learned about energy and matter exchange. 
When you are ready to begin the Unit Assignment, go to the unit assessment section of the course for instructions and a guide to learn how the written response will be marked. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education