Module 3—Ecosystems and Their Diversity
 Lab: Leaf Size
1. Background:
morphology: the form and structure of an organism or any of its parts
Abiotic conditions in the environment affect biotic components in the environment. You will examine the effects of different abiotic conditions on the morphology of plant leaves. The leaves on plants in two different locations with different abiotic conditions will be studied.
You will have two options to complete this lab—by conducting an outdoor lab to collect data or by completing a lab simulation. You may choose to do the simulation if the trees in your area currently do not have leaves. The season and or your preference may be the deciding factor. 
2. Instructions: Read through the whole series of lab steps before beginning.2a. Purpose/Problem:  Do different abiotic conditions affect a plant’s morphology (eg: leaf size, leaf colour,...)? 
2b. Procedure/Materials:Outdoor Lab Option - If the season permits and leaves are measurable on the trees, you will need a ruler, a chart for recording your data, and access to plants of the same species in two different areas. The steps for the outoor lab option are:
Consult with your teacher to find a suitable location for this study. You will be measuring the leaves of a species of plant from two different locations that have different abiotic conditions (for example, a tree near a lake compared to one in a meadow or a tree by a road compared to a tree in a forested area). 
You need to access your Module 3: Lesson 1 Assignment. You will be recording your observations and answering questions on this document. Be sure to save this document .
Make a prediction. Do you expect to see any differences in the length of the leaves between the two trees? Use the "If _______, then______, because_____" format. Do not use the first person ucah as I, I think, we,...!
In the data table, describe the abiotic factors and the location of each tree.
Measure and record the lengths of 25 leaves from each tree.
Calculate the average leaf length for each tree.
Simulation Lab Option - If the season does not permit for outdoor lab work, you will use the simulation to complete you lab. You will need a chart for recording your data. The steps for the simulation lab option are:
Open the Leaf Size Lab simulation and observe the two different locations of the trees.  (Having trouble seeing this lab? If so you need to use Internet Explorer or Microsoft Edge as your browser to view Adobe Flash)
Access the Module 3: Lesson 1 Assignment. You will be recording your observations and answering questions on this document. Be sure to save this document to your course folder.
Prediction: Make a prediction. Do you expect to see any differences in the length of the leaves between the two trees? Use the "If _______, then______, because_____" format. Do not use the first person such as I, I think, we,...!
Observations: Use the data table provided in your Module 3: Lesson 1 Assignment to record your data, observations to describe the abiotic factors and the location of each tree. Measure and record the lengths of 25 leaves from each tree. 
Analysis: Answer the calculations and questions found on the Module 3: Lesson 1 Assignment. Calculate the average leaf length for each tree.
Conclusion: Answer the questions found in your Module 3: Lesson 1 Assignment. 
 Going Beyond
Urban forests are forests found in cities. On the surface, the words urban and forest seem like an oxymoron—the words contradict each other. However, trees are found throughout cities and towns. The City of Edmonton believes that taking care of trees is important. Go to the City of Edmonton website. To find this site use the keywords “City of Edmonton.” Click on the “Environment” link at the top of the page. From there, use the menu on the left to choose “Beautification.” Read the information about urban forestry.
Consider the following questions:
Why are city trees important?
What would cities be like without trees?
What do cities do to keep their trees healthy?
How might the results of this lab be useful to urban foresters?
How might this lab be useful to an ecologist working for Parks Canada?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education