Module 3—Ecosystems and Their Diversity
 Explore
 Read
Much like the periodic table of elements is universal to all scientists to identify the natural elements, biologists have developed rules of taxonomy that allow scientists to easily identify and communicate about species in an ecosystem.
taxonomy: the practice of classifying organisms based on common fundamental characteristics
domain: the highest level of classification of living things (above kingdom)
There is estimated to be somewhere between 10 and 100 million different species of organisms in the world. The field of taxonomy is the practice of classifying organisms. All organisms are classified into three domains. The three domains are Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya.
These rules of taxonomy are why a robin and a human are named differently. Different names are given to different organisms so that people are able to communicate better. If there wasn’t a name for a robin, it would take a long time to describe the type of bird sitting outside your window.
To learn more about the development of modern taxonomy practices, read pages 85 to 88 in your textbook.
 Self-Check
SC 1. Why are fungi not in the same kingdom as plants?
SC 2. What is the benefit for scientists to use binomial nomenclature rather than common names?
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 1.  While fungi do not move, they lack chloroplasts and are not photosynthetic; they use digestive enzymes to break down food sources into absorbable molecules.
SC 2.  Scientific names are universal, whereas a common name may be confusing and not the same in different regions. For example, panther, puma, and mountain lion all refer to the same species—Puma concolor.
 Watch and Listen
View the following animation to review the three-domain system of classification. The domain system is an evolutionary model of classification based on cell structure. This system proposes that a common ancestor cell gave rise to three different cell types, each representing a domain.
The three domains are the Archaea (archaebacteria), the Bacteria (eubacteria), and the Eukarya (eukaryotes). The Eukarya are then divided into four kingdoms: Protists, Fungi, Animalia, and Plantae. Organisms are placed into kingdoms depending on cell type, their ability to make food, and the number of cells in their body. For example, a daisy is classified as part of the Plantae kingdom because it is multicellular, it contains a nucleus, it contains a chloroplast that carries out photosynthesis, and the cells have a cell wall.
The following animation reviews the three-domain system of classification and introduces the six kingdoms.
Design a table to organize the kingdoms within their proper domains.  
 Read
Domains are subdivided into kingdoms. There are four kingdoms in the Eukarya domain: Protista, Fungi, Plantae, and Animalia. Each of these kingdoms is further subdivided into phyla, then class, order, family, genus, and species. Within each subdivision, the groups become more and more similar in physical characteristics and genetic makeup.
The following mnemonic table may help you remember the order of the subdivisions from domain to species.
Domain
Danish
Kingdom
King
Phylum
Phillip
Class
Came
Order
Over
Family
For
Genus
Green
Species
Spinach
 Try This 1 - Hierarchical Order
TR 1. In this self-marking quiz, drag and drop the categories in hierarchical order, beginning with domain.
 Try This 2 - Arthropod Activity
1. TR2 - Background: Insects belong to the kingdom Animalia, the phylum Arthropoda, and the class Insecta. About one million species of insects have been classified, and there are probably several times that number still to be named.
morphological: having to do with the form and structure of an organism
The phylum Arthropoda not only contains insects but also contains organisms like lobsters, spiders, scorpions, and centipedes. Two out of three living things on Earth belong to the phylum Arthropoda. In the following activity you will use organisms’ anatomical or morphological characteristics to categorize arthropods into the different classes.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education