Module 3—Ecosystems and Their Diversity
 Reflect and Connect
Go back to the beginning of this lesson, and think about the trip to a national park. Now that you have worked through Lesson 1, can you identify some of the more important relationships that exist between the species you could have encountered?
© Abstractx /Dreamstime
 Reflect on the Big Picture
In the Big Picture for this lesson and module you are asked to think about what makes a vacation spot unique and to identify how vacationers may affect ecosystems they visit. Well-studied distinct ecosystems in Alberta are national parks, which are prime vacation destinations.
Integrate what you know about the interactions of biotic and abiotic components of an ecosystem to apply this information to the concept of maintaining ecological integrity.
Ecological integrity exists when human activity doesn’t interfere with the structure and function of an ecosystem. In other words, the stressors present in an ecosystem are manageable. The ecosystem will adapt and continue to coexist alongside human activity without being drastically altered. 
Parks Canada Ecological Integrity Advertisement
© Ulrike Hammerich/iStockphoto
Parks Canada constantly monitors ecosystem changes in order to maintain and restore ecological integrity. Your task is to develop a public-awareness advertisement describing the work Parks Canada does to maintain ecological integrity in national parks.
Consider the following questions:
In your own words, what does ecological integrity mean to you?
Why is ecological integrity important in national parks?
What are some stressors affecting ecological integrity? Describe how humans are directly and indirectly causing many of these stresses.
How does Parks Canada monitor ecological integrity?
How does Parks Canada maintain ecological integrity?
How does Parks Canada draw on the traditional knowledge of First Peoples and integrate this knowledge into the management of park ecosystems?
The Parks Canada Website on Ecosystem Management will provide plenty of information to answer these questions. To get to this website, perform a search by entering the keywords “parks Canada” into a search engine. Once at the Parks Canada website, enter “ecosystem management” into the website search bar. You will know you have chosen the correct article if the navigation bar to the left contains headings such as the following: “Ecosystem Principles” and “Ecosystem Restoration.”
 Going Beyond
© D. Owens
Are you interested in helping Parks Canada maintain ecological integrity? Do you enjoy working outdoors? Maybe a career with Parks Canada interests you. Student summer jobs and careers are available. Are you qualified? Check out the Parks Canada website to learn more about the types of jobs available in ecology and what qualifications are needed.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education