Module 7—The Digestive and Respiratory Systems 
 Module Summary
In this module you studied the digestive and respiratory systems. In the first lesson you explored the molecules of living systems: proteins, fats, and carbohydrates. Each molecule has specific characteristics that make them unique. Your body uses these nutrients and enzymes to sustain life. 
These macromolecules are made up of smaller, chemically simpler subunits. Macromolecules are assembled by dehydration synthesis and are disassembled by hydrolysis. These reactions either add or remove a molecule of water. Each macromolecule has a corresponding enzyme that speeds up chemical reactions such as hydrolysis. Enzymes are designed to have an active site for a specific molecule, or substrate, on its surface. 
The substrate will bind to the active site on the enzyme. Bonds in the substrate become less stable and are thus easier to break. This speeds up the process of breaking down substrates or creating new compounds. Enzymes work best under optimal conditions. Factors such as fluctuations in temperature or pH can affect the shape of an enzyme and, therefore, its ability to bind with a substrate molecule. 
Inhibitor compounds can also bind to the active site of an enzyme to prevent substrate molecules from binding. A knowledge of these molecules was necessary for you to understand how the digestive system worked together from gums to bums to digest macromolecules. Lesson 2 explored each organ involved in digestion from the mouth to the colon. You also explored how the body exchanges matter and energy via the digestive system. Nutrient absorption, occurring primarily in the small intestine, provides cells with the necessary resources to maintain and repair cellular function. For example, mitochondrion depend on the digestion of carbohydrates to fuel ATP synthesis. 
The respiratory system was introduced in Lesson 3. As with all body systems, there is energy and matter exchange occurring via the respiratory system. Primarily, your respiratory system serves to exchange carbon dioxide and oxygen. Oxygen is required for aerobic respiration, and carbon dioxide is a product of aerobic respiration. The act of respiration involving your lungs continuously exchanges oxygen and carbon dioxide in the alveoli. 
Breathing is regulated by the need to remove carbon dioxide from your body. Chemoreceptors sense a buildup of carbon dioxide and stimulate the diaphragm to relax. This causes you to breathe out. The air pressure inside your lungs when the diaphragm is relaxed is higher than external air pressure. In order to maintain equilibrium, air will move from high pressure to low pressure. When you breathe in, the diaphragm is contracted to create more volume and less pressure inside your chest cavity. In an effort to maintain pressure equilibrium, you will inhale. 
You looked at the pattern of respiration through interpreting a spirograph. By measuring the volumes of inhalation and exhalation, you can determine levels of fitness or help to diagnose several health conditions. The respiratory system is also a mechanism for body temperature control. Heat produced by cellular respiration is dissipated into the lungs and transferred to the external environment with each inhalation. Conversely, cold air is warmed along its journey to the alveoli in an effort to maintain body equilibrium. 
In Lesson 4 you learned about the effects of lifestyle choice, germs, and genetics on the health of your digestive and respiratory system and about how technology may limit or benefit the treatment of any disorders. You were asked to compare traditional and Western medicine practices. 
Traditional medicine incorporates the use of herbal and spiritual remedies to cure illness. In contrast, Western medicine often approaches the treatment of disease by drugs, invasive medical treatments, and surgery. By investigating a variety of diseases you discovered how disorders interrupt the body’s natural exchange of matter and flow of energy. Both traditional and Western medicines attempt to restore homeostatic balance to your body system. However, medicine cannot cure all diseases. Being healthy is a function of smart lifestyle choices and available technology that can help you maintain or restore homeostasis. 
This module has allowed you to investigate two important systems. Each system—digestive and respiratory—plays an important role in maintaining homeostasis. In the final module of this course, you will explore the circulatory, immune, and excretory systems.   
Module Glossary
anabolic: the metabolic process that builds larger molecules from smaller molecules 
catabolic: the metabolic process in which materials are broken down 
catalyze: to increase the rate of reaction 
chemoreceptor: detects chemical stimuli in the environment and turns stimuli into electrical nerve impulses that signal parts of the body to respond accordingly 
chyme: the partially digested, semi-fluid mass of food that is forced from the stomach into the small intestine 
cilia: small, hairlike organs on the surface of some cells, particularly cells lining the upper respiratory tract 
Their wavelike movements waft particles of dust and debris outward; Latin for “eyelash.” 
dehydration synthesis: an enzyme-controlled composition reaction in which compounds are formed by the removal of water 
emphysema: an obstructive respiratory disorder in which the walls of alveoli break down and lose elasticity 
There are fewer individual air sacs as walls break down, thus reducing the surface area for gas exchange. A loss of elasticity makes exhaling more difficult. 
feedback inhibition: the process by which the accumulated end product of a biochemical pathway stops the synthesis of that product 
hydrolysis: the decomposition of a compound in a reaction by using water 
pepsin: a digestive enzyme found in gastric juice that catalyzes the breakdown of protein to peptides 
pepsinogen: the inactive precursor to pepsin formed in the chief cells of the mucous membrane of the stomach and converted to pepsin by hydrochloric acid during digestion 
peristalsis: the wavelike series of muscular contractions and relaxations in structures such as the esophagus 
sphincter: a ringlike muscular structure that normally maintains constriction of a natural body passage or orifice and that relaxes as required by normal physiological functioning 
substrate molecule: a molecule that an enzyme interacts with chemically 
For example, the enzyme sucrase only binds to the substrate molecule of sucrose. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education