Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
 Read
As a summary of Chapter 1 of your textbook, read page 29 from the book.
 Try This 4
TR 4 - Section 1.2 Review: Answer question 10 on page 27 of your textbook. Be sure to answer all parts of the question, and clearly show your calculations. Be sure to use significant digits when possible. Check the following box to see metric conversions.
Metric conversions.
TR 4.
1000 g = 1 kg1 t = 1000 kg1000 J = 1 kJ
 Reflect and Connect
© Heiko Potthoff/iStockphoto
Remember the diagram from Lesson 1? Now that you know more about energy flow through trophic levels, how could you modify the diagram? Complete any revisions and save the file again. The diagram will be revisited. 
 Self-Check
SC 6. Answer questions 7 and 8 on page 27 of the textbook.
SC 7. Answer questions 1, 5, 9, 12, 16, and 19 on pages 30 and 31.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 6. 
7. The unit area in a measure of biomass provides a basis of comparison and can be considered a controlled variable. Without including the unit area, comparisons of dry weight would be meaningless.
8. a) less producers = less energy for higher trophic levels (limits food supplies) = less organisms at each trophic level
b) more secondary consumers = less primary consumers = more producers → there would be more energy available for primary consumers
SC 7.
1. Decomposers feed on once living or organic matter to survive; they are not creating their own energy.
5. The spring melt is starting earlier, the sea ice is thin, and the weather is unusual. These observations coincide with scientific data.
9. a) Species have varied diets. For example, people eat vegetables (primary consumer) but also eat fish (tertiary consumer).
b) When an organism is not dependent on only one food source, the chances of it surviving a year where that food source was scarce is increased. When organisms can ensure survival through hardship (fluctuations in energy flow), an ecosystem has greater stability (greater biodiversity = greater stability).
12. Seasons (winter—snow covered and leaves are gone), drought, and the amount and intensity of sunlight can limit growth.
16. The relative number of producers that can support consumers is greater in a grassland due to the size of the producer; an aspen tree can support many primary consumers due to its size.
19. a) producer to primary consumer—rule of 10—1 kg X 10 = 10 kg of strawberries would have to be eaten for you to gain 1 kg of mass.
b) producer to primary consumer to secondary consumer to tertiary consumer—rule of 10—1 kg x 10 x 10 x 10 = 1000 kg of plant material would be consumed through this food chain so that you could gain 1 kg of mass.
 Reflect on the Big Picture
What is energy? For most organisms, it comes from what they eat. As you stand outside, possibly in your backyard, you should have a better appreciation for the importance of plants. You should also have an understanding of why people are outnumbered, and you should possess the ability to compare the transfer of energy in your ecosystem with that of an aquatic or extreme (deep sea or arctic) ecosystem. You have now mastered how energy flows and are now heading to the realm of cycling matter.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education