Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
 Explore
 Read
Begin this lesson by reading page 16 of your textbook up to and including the left side of page 18. This information reviews what you have previously learned about feeding relationships in ecosystems. Organisms can be identified in many ways, such as through feeding relationships, and organisms can be organized into trophic levels. These levels also indicate the amount of energy available to organisms.
 Self-Check
SC 1. Answer question 14 on page 16 of the textbook.
SC 2. Answer questions 15 and 16 on page 18 of the textbook.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 1.
The first trophic level contains producers. The secondary trophic level contains primary consumers, while the third level is made up of secondary consumers. Tertiary consumers are in the fourth level, and the fifth trophic level is composed of quaternary consumers.
SC 2.
Less energy is transferred from one trophic level to the next trophic level because from 80 to 95 percent of chemical energy is transferred to waste products and to the environment as heat during cellular respiration. This is summarized as the “rule of 10,” which means that approximately 10 percent of the initial energy at one trophic level will transfer to the next, a different trophic level.
Food chains are limited in length because eventually the available transferable energy dwindles to nothing. An example is that 100 kJ energy −> 10 kJ energy −> 1 kJ energy −> 0.1 kJ energy, and so on.
 Read
Continue reading from pages 18 to 24 in your textbook. Be sure to take note of the many different diagrams. These diagrams are a visual way of organizing and presenting the transfer of energy from one trophic level to another trophic level by showing biomass, the available energy, or the numbers of organisms. After these readings you will be asked to compare and contrast these diagrams and to use math to show energy flow through trophic levels. 
SC 5. Answer question 18 from page 24 of the textbook.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 5.
An energy pyramid cannot be inverted. An energy pyramid shows the reduction in energy amounts at each trophic level rather than numbers of organisms or biomass. Energy is interpreted the same way by scientists, whereas biomass is not. There are no exceptions as to how energy is interpreted. Energy will ALWAYS be less as you move up through the trophic levels
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education