Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
 Module Summary
Now that you have completed Module 1, you should have a better idea that there are two methods by which energy is captured in the biosphere. They are the processes of photosynthesis and chemosynthesis, which you studied in Lesson 1. You’ll remember that photosynthesis, which captures solar energy, is the process by which approximately 98% of terrestrial producers capture energy. The other 2% of producers live in extreme environments where they have no access to solar energy, so they rely on the process of chemosynthesis. Because the majority of terrestrial producers capture solar energy, people say that it is solar energy that maintains the biosphere! 
What about the release of energy? Do you remember the process in which this takes place? If you are thinking of cellular respiration, you are correct. As you saw in Lesson 2, any energy in the biosphere that is converted into useful chemical energy during the photosynthetic and chemosynthetic processes is also used by producers and consumers at various trophic levels. This happens through the process of cellular respiration. Cellular respiration allows organisms to convert the chemical energy into forms of energy that sustain life. 
Do you remember the second law of thermodynamics? It states that during any energy conversion, some energy is lost as heat—a non-usable form of energy. This heat is then radiated back into the atmosphere, where it is either released into outer space or captured by greenhouse gases and re-emitted back toward Earth’s surface. 
It is important that you realize that cellular respiration is not only a means of radiating energy back into the biosphere. This process also allows for the flow of energy through the biosphere. In Lesson 2 you studied food chains in food webs. This allowed you to understand that animals, and the food chains they form, allow for the transfer or flow of energy in the biosphere. You also learned that only 10% of the energy acquired by an organism is passed on to the next trophic level until there is not enough energy to sustain another organism. In Lesson 2 you also learned that animals assist in the recycling of matter in the biosphere. 
In Lesson 3 there was an explanation that the water cycle plays a central role in the cycling of all matter. Nearly all matter is able to dissolve in water. (Water is often called a universal solvent.) This makes water an excellent carrier of all molecules that make up matter. You will remember that water vapour can travel long distances and, therefore, can carry molecules between ecosystems. This allows matter anywhere in the biosphere to be replenished. The other point you learned about the water cycle in Lesson 3 is that the characteristic which allows it to work with all the other cycles also makes it quite vulnerable to pollution. 
In Lesson 4 you found out that matter must cycle through both biotic and abiotic reservoirs in order to cycle in the biosphere. You should now know that biotic reservoirs are all living and recently living matter and abiotic reservoirs are all non-living components of the biosphere. You also learned that the whole point of recycling matter is for producers to obtain molecules from which they create organic compounds. The organic compounds formed from these recycled molecules include carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids—all of which are required for the survival of all living organisms. 
Lesson 5 focused on the relationship of biodiversity and biomagnification with energy flow and the cycling of matter in the biosphere. 
In Module 2 you will build on the concepts you have learned and studied in Module 1. 
Module Glossary
acid deposition: the deposit of acid to land and water through acidic rain, snow, or sleet 
adhesion: the tendency of unlike molecules to cling together because of attractive forces 
Water is adhesive also due to polarity—the negative and positively charged molecules in water attract other ionic molecules. 
biodiversity: a variety in the number and kind of species in a given area 
biogeochemical cycle: a diagram representing the movement of elements and compounds between living and non-living components of an ecosystem 
biomagnification: the buildup of harmful chemicals in higher trophic levels (top predators) 
biosphere: all areas on Earth that can sustain life and are inhabited by organisms (air, water, land) 
carbon sink: a system that removes more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere than it releases into the atmosphere 
chemosynthesis: the process by which certain fungi and bacteria use the energy from chemical nutrients to chemically convert carbon (inorganic) into carbohydrates (organic) 
cohesion: inter-molecular attraction between like-molecules of a substance 
Water is strongly cohesive due to the polarity of its molecules. 
conservationist: someone who advocates saving and/ or conserving natural resources 
consumers: organisms that must obtain their food (energy) by eating other organisms (producers or consumers); also called heterotrophs 
denitrification: the process of converting nitrates in the soil into nitrogen gas 
denitrifying bacteria: a type of soil bacteria that converts nitrates in soil into nitrogen gas, releasing this gas to the atmosphere 
ecological footprint: an analysis of human consumption of natural resources compared to the ability of Earth to recreate them 
This analysis gives an estimate of the area (hectares) required for humans to live based on their given lifestyles—most North American lifestyles are not currently sustainable according to the analyses. 
equilibrium: all living components of the biosphere (e.g., humans, bacteria, plants) balance in a system; the overall fluctuations in the system balance out and there is no net change over time 
eutrophication: excessive plant growth and decay caused by an excessive amount of chemical nutrients 
first law of thermodynamics: energy in a system cannot be created nor destroyed; it changes forms 
food chain: a diagram or model that uses a straight line to show how food (energy) transfers from producers to primary consumers to higher trophic levels 
food web: a diagram or model that shows the connections among food chains (food/energy transfer) in an ecosystem 
heat capacity: the amount of heat energy (J) required to change the temperature of one gram of substance by 1°C 
Water has a high heat capacity of 4.19 J/g °C. 
limiting factor: any biotic or abiotic factor that controls or limits the functioning of an organism 
nitrification: the process of converting ammonia into nitrates or nitrites 
nitrifying bacteria: a type of soil bacteria that converts ammonia into nitrates and nitrites 
nitrogen fixation: the process of converting nitrogen gas into ammonia 
peat: deep layers of mosses and plant remains unable to completely decompose due to the lack of oxygen in water-saturated soil 
photoautotrophs: photosynthetic producers 
photosynthesis: the process by which plants, algae, and some kinds of bacteria use solar energy to chemically convert carbon (inorganic) into carbohydrates (organic) such as sugars and starches 
producers: organisms that are able to produce their own food (energy) by harnessing chemical or solar energy; also called autotrophs 
trophic level: describes the feeding level through which matter and energy are transferred; indicates an organism’s position in the food chain (e.g., producer, primary consumer, secondary consumer) 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education