Module 4—Mechanisms of Population Change
 Reflect and Connect
A. Instructions: Complete one of the following activities.
1. Create a mind map to show the connections between mutations, sexual reproduction, variation, and natural selection.2. Give a visual or text-based example or representation for each of the following:
sexual selection 
biotic selective pressure 
abiotic selective pressure 
variation
natural selection 
3. Make two lists using text or images. The first list should include organisms with characteristics that could have evolved by sexual selection. The second list should include organisms with features that likely evolved due to natural selection where the organism’s food source could have been the selective pressure. 
 Reflect on the Big Picture
A. Instructions: You have seen the importance of variation in the survival of a species and learned how variation affects the evolution of a population. A population needs variation in order to survive environmental changes. When one organism has an advantage because of a variation, it can survive. When the organism reproduces, it passes on the adaptation to its offspring. Eventually, over time and many generations, most of the population will have this adaptation. The accumulation of adaptations causes the population to evolve.
Can you look at your own life and see examples of variation? Do any of these variations give you or your friends an advantage? Make a list of these variations, and discuss them with a relative, friend or a classmate.
 Going Beyond
A. Instructions: Choose one of the following two activities to complete.
How does natural selection explain the development of the human eye? What type of evidence do scientists have that this theory might be correct? The PBS website contains content that specifically discusses the eye, and it contains a link to a video that helps explain how natural selection may have created the eye. Use an Internet search engine to find this site by typing in the keywords “pbs evolution library.” Once at this site, you can search for “evolution of the eye.” Put your answers in your course notes. 
Read a chapter from Darwin’s book, The Origin of Species. In “Chapter 4: Natural Selection,” Darwin discusses sexual selection and gives some examples of natural selection. You may find the language difficult but, at the same time, interesting. Take an example of natural or sexual selection from this chapter and, in your own words, add it to your course notes. 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education