Module 3—Ecosystems and Their Diversity
 Read
morphology: the physical structure and form of an organism; the outward appearance of an organism
dichotomous key: an identification key that uses a series of paired comparisons to sort organisms into smaller and smaller groups
From your work in Lesson 2, you should be able to classify organisms into their domains and kingdoms based on cellular characteristics. In this lesson you will learn to use characteristics based on morphology to identify organisms.
Read page 89 in your textbook, and look at the structure of “Table 3.2.” This key will help you to make more specific classifications of an organism based on observable characteristics.
One way to identify different species is to use a dichotomous key. A dichotomous key is a series of yes and no questions that lead to the identification of a species. Questions in a dichotomous key refer to observable characteristics that can be used to identify an organism at the genus species level. This is the italicized Latin name that is recognized by scientists worldwide.
 Try This 1 - Dichotomous Key Examples
1. TR1 - Background: Dichotomous keys can also be created in an electronic format. Try using the following examples for practice and to see how dichotomous keys are structured.
Now try identifying plants with dichotomous keys by using another website. To find this web activity, type the keywords “world web wonders dichotomous key” into a search engine. The first link that appears should be the link to the correct activity. If you wish, you may try other sites that you find in your search.
 Try This 2 - Arthropod Activity - Creating a Dichotomous Key
© Elena Elisseeva/shutterstock
1. TR2 - Background: In this activity you will be completing “Investigation 3.B: Creating a Dichotomous Key” on page 90 in the textbook. To give you an idea of how to create a dichotomous key, read the example page on “How to Make a Dichotomous Key for Shoes.”
 Self-Check
SC 1. Answer question 5. a) and b) on page 92 of your textbook.
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answer
SC 1.
a) and b) Squirrel → Step 1a. → (Class Mammalia)Tufted Puffin → Step 1b. → Step 2a. → (Class Aves)Lamprey Eel → Step 1b. → Step 2b. → Step 3b. → (Class Agnatha)Trout → Step 1b. → Step 2b. → Step 3a. →Step 4a. → Step 5a. → Class OsteichthyesShark → Step 1b. → Step 2b. → Step 3a. →Step 4a. → Step 5b. → Class ChondrichthyesSnake → Step 1b. → Step 2b. → Step 3a. →Step 4b. → Step 6a. → Class ReptiliaFrog → Step 1b. → Step 2b. → Step 3a. →Step 4b. → Step 6b. → Class Amphibia
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education