Module 4—Mechanisms of Population Change
 Reflect and Connect - Evidence for Evolution Summary
 Discuss - Evidence for Evolution
A. Background: 
There are many examples and types of evidence for evolution.  You have been looking at fossils/transitional fossils, patterns of distribution/biogeography, anatomy, embryology, molecular biology and genetics.  
What type of evidence (what category) do you find the most compelling and why? 
Do a little bit of independent research and give one good example of evidence for evolution that you find interesting.  You can start with something you initially found in your text or the online content, but you should then move on to material from other sources (cite your sources!) to further support and explain your example.
What is your example of evidence for evolution?  Explain and support your example.  
What is it that you find most interesting/compelling about the example you chose?
 Reflect on the Big Picture
You have now explored different types of evidence for evolution.  Reflect on these and the following questions now. One of the options for the Unit B Assessment require you to incorporate this new information. The information is also required for future exams. 
Jot down notes to answer these questions.
How do mutations create species variability?
Why is sexual reproduction important to the process of evolution?
How do theories explaining evolutionary change compare?
What theories are the foundation of modern evolutionary change ideas?
What proof is there that present-day species evolved from ancestral forms?
Save any thoughts in your Biology 20 course notes with a proper file name for future review.
 Going Beyond - The Burgess Shale
Reproduced with the permission of the Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada, 2004 and Courtesy of Natural Resources Canada, Geological Survey of Canada. 
Note: Read, understand, be able to complete and discuss the concepts presented below. However, actually completing and submitting the work is an optional exercise in this lesson unless otherwise indicated by the instructor. If completed, share your work in the general discussion area for this module and/or add to the Module 4: Lesson 3 Assignment and submit at the end of the lesson along with any additional lesson work.
1. Background: The organism shown here is unique to the Burgess Shale. Some fossils in the shale have never been found anywhere else in the world.
2. Procedure: Do some research to find out what unique and interesting fossils have been found in the Burgess Shale. What have scientists learned from these fossils? Why is the Burgess Shale a protected area?
3. Discussion: Post your information in the discussion area.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education