Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
 Lesson Summary
In this lesson you explored the following essential questions: 
 How can you model the transfer of energy and matter between organisms?
 How can you use math to explain the differences in energy flow in different ecosystem food chains?
 conservationist: someone who advocates saving and/or conserving natural resources
During this lesson you should have learned that energy transfer through food chains is very inefficient. You may have considered becoming a vegetarian if you are a conservationist. And you should be able to model and calculate energy transfer in a variety of ways. If you don’t think that you have this mastered, you should talk to your teacher.
You also looked at a variety of different ecosystems and the biodiversity within these systems. Remember that stable ecosystems have a greater biodiversity than unstable ecosystems. Stable ecosystems, such as a tropical rainforest, are less affected by changes at any given trophic level or changes to the environment. 
This is because organisms at higher trophic levels have a more varied diet and can feed on a variety of food sources, as opposed to an unstable ecosystem, such as the Arctic, where organisms at higher trophic levels have a very specific food source. In an ecosystem like the Arctic, slight changes to global temperature may more easily affect organisms at the lower trophic levels of a food chain.
As you move to Lesson 3, you will begin to explore the importance of water in cycling matter.
Lesson Glossary
conservationist: someone who advocates saving and/ or conserving natural resources
food chain: a diagram or model that uses a straight line to show how food (energy) transfers from producers to primary consumers to higher trophic levels
food web: a diagram or model that shows the connections among food chains (food/energy transfer) in an ecosystem
trophic level: describes the feeding level through which matter and energy are transferred; indicates an organism’s position in the food chain (e.g., producer, primary consumer, secondary consumer)
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education