Module 2—Biosphere Equilibrium and the Impact of Humans
 Module Summary
Now that you have completed Module 2, you should realize you are not just a passive passenger on Planet Earth. Instead, you are an active organism. Your actions, and the actions of those around you, have an effect on biosphere equilibrium. You leave an ecological footprint. 
You should now know that equilibrium is not static. Equilibrium is dynamic. In other words, equilibrium is constantly adjusting to changes in energy flow and cycles of matter. Problems arise when these changes in energy flow and cycling of matter become too extreme for the biosphere to maintain its dynamic balance.  The changes are often due to human activities. 
As a biology student, you should understand the consequences of human actions on the world around you. Then you can make choices that benefit the well-being of your backyard as well as the biosphere. You learned about the observed effects of climate change in the Canadian Arctic as one example of human influence on the biosphere. This is but one of many consequences of human influence on the biosphere. 
In order to look at climate change, it was necessary to look at the changes in Earth’s atmosphere over time. As well, you studied the balance of gas exchange (oxygen vs carbon dioxide). 
It is up to you to use the knowledge you have gained in Module 2 in order to take care of the biosphere. As you have witnessed, there is definitely a need for change in the way humans view natural resources. This is evident when you start to look at your own ecological footprint. When you are informed you can make better choices for the biosphere. If you believe that “we are all connected as one,” then you will use what you know to try to ensure that dynamic balance exists between energy and matter.   
Module Glossary
anoxic: lacking free oxygen 
ecological footprint: an analysis of human consumption of natural resources compared to the ability of Earth to recreate them 
An ecological footprint gives an estimate of the area in hectares that is required for a human to live based on his or her lifestyle. Most North American lifestyles are not currently sustainable, according to the analyses. 
stromatolites: sedimentary rock in oceans built from fossilized micro-organisms, such as bacteria 
sustainable: capable of being continued with minimal long-term effects on the environment 
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education