Module 1—Energy Flow and the Cycling of Matter
 Explore
 Read
biodiversity: a variety in the number and kind of species in a given area
biomagnification: the buildup of harmful chemicals in higher trophic levels (top predators)
Begin this lesson by reading “Biomagnification: A Fish Story” on page 28 of your textbook. You don’t need to attempt the questions yet.
To further your understanding, watch this video. 
 Self-Check
SC 1. How do you think biomagnification could have a destabilizing effect on an aquatic ecosystem?
SC 2. What role does the hydrologic cycle play?
SC 3. How can the effects of biomagnification be reduced?
Check your work.
 Self-Check Answers
SC 1. By reaching high levels of concentration at the top predator level, top predators can be affected by dying off or by becoming sick. If the predators die off, then there would be an increase in lower trophic level organisms. This would alter the transfer of energy.
More organisms would be alive at one point than is usual for the ecosystem, which would put a strain on the amount of oxygen in the water. A lake could begin to die. Also, as it is decomposed, the decaying fish would re-release the harmful chemical right back into the ecosystem. The cycle would be never ending until the chemical broke down or all of the organisms died.
SC 2. The hydrologic cycle transports naturally occurring and artificial chemicals into water systems through runoff and precipitation.
SC 3. The effects of biomagnification can be reduced by properly disposing wastes and by reducing the need for these harmful chemicals in industries.
 Try This 1 - Biomagnification: A Fish Story
Procedure: TR 1. Complete questions 1 to 5 on page 28 of your textbook.
 Try This 2 - Biomagnification: A Fish Story
Procedure: TR 2. How does the cycling of a harmful element compare to a biogeochemical cycle?
 Reflect on the Big Picture
Question: What can biodiversity and biomagnification tell you about the biosphere’s state of equilibrium?
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education