Unit D Introduction
An underlying theme throughout your study of biology has been the concept of homeostasis. Unit A described the balance maintained between biotic and abiotic components of the biosphere. Unit B looked more specifically at the balance achieved in ecosystems and populations through evolution and adaptation. Unit C described the flow of energy and matter at the cellular level and investigated factors that affect the flow of energy and matter. In this unit you will learn more about something that you live with every day—your own body systems.  You will apply the concept of homeostasis and the flow of energy and matter to the functioning of your body.
© Simon Krzi/iStockphoto
© Ioana Drutu/shutterstock
While working through the following modules and lessons of Unit D, keep the following in mind. Despite the great degree of specialization of your body’s organs, they are still capable of working together. This provides an overall balance for the lifetime of your body. This delicate equilibrium can be better appreciated when you investigate the conditions that occur if the balance is tipped and the body’s systems fail. You will also explore how modern medical technologies can support the prevention and treatment of the disorders that may result.
In this unit you will study the structure and function of different human organ systems. Included will be the digestive, respiratory, circulatory, immune, excretory, and motor systems. There is a tendency to examine each system separately and independently. Remind yourself that none of these systems can exist in isolation and that their interdependence is necessary for the body’s survival. The human body exchanges matter and energy with the environment. You are able to maintain an internal equilibrium because each system has the ability to interact and adjust to any changes that may occur.
How do specialized structures function in the overall biochemical balance of the living system? What conditions result if these structures do not function normally? How does a knowledge of living systems and medical technology support the prevention and treatment of disorders? These are questions you should consider as you work through Unit D.
This unit consists of three modules. These modules will explain how the maintenance of metabolic equilibrium involves a number of physical and biochemical processes. You will use the human body to model how energy and matter are exchanged with the environment through the processes of gas exchange, digestion, excretion, circulation, and the function of the motor system. You will also learn how equilibrium is maintained with the help of an immune system.
Specifically, you will be able to 
 explain the role of the motor system in the function of other body systems
 explain how the human digestive and respiratory systems exchange energy and matter with the environment
 explain the role of the excretory system in maintaining an internal equilibrium in humans through the exchange of energy and matter with the environment
 explain the role of the circulatory and defense systems in maintaining internal equilibrium
As you work through this unit and its modules, you will find Self-Check questions, Try This assignments, labs, and discussions. There will be lesson assignments, which will be indicated at the beginning of each lesson and then clearly identified throughout the lesson. All of the course work that you complete, whether it is for assessment or not, should be saved in your course folder. Think of the course folder as your binder for storing course materials and review notes.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education