Module 5—Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration
 Explore
 Read
The Calvin-Benson Cycle
Calvin-Benson cycle: the process in which photosynthetic organisms fix carbon from atmospheric carbon dioxide to produce carbohydrates
carbon-dioxide fixation: a carbon atom in carbon dioxide is chemically bonded to a pre-existing 5-carbon compound in the stroma of the chloroplast
ribulose biphosphate (RuBP): a 5-carbon molecule in the stroma that initially bonds to carbon dioxide
ATP: a reduced high-energy adenosine triphosphate molecule
NADPH: a reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide molecule
phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL): a high-energy compound used to make glucose
glucose: a saccharide or sugar; can be linked to many other saccharides to form different types of sugars or carbohydrates
As photosynthesis progresses to the light-independent reactions, these reactions move from the thylakoid space to the stroma of the chloroplast. It is not necessarily dark outside either.
Simply put, light-independent reactions do not directly depend on light energy in order to proceed. They do, however, depend on the products of the light-dependent reactions of NADPH and ATP. The energy contained in these two molecules is used in glucose synthesis.
Once again, there are a series of reactions that take place to synthesize carbohydrates (glucose). This series of reactions takes place in the Calvin-Benson cycle. The purpose of the cycle is for carbon-dioxide fixation. When studying the Calvin-Benson cycle, you will be introduced to the following familiar and unfamiliar molecules.
Ribulose biphosphate (RuBP) is a 5-carbon molecule in the stroma that initially bonds to carbon dioxide. After RuBP is bonded to carbon, it becomes unstable and breaks down into two 3-carbon molecules:
RuBP + C02 (g) → unstable C6 → 2 C3
The two low energy, 3-carbon molecules are activated by ATP and reduced by NADPH (gain electrons) to become high-energy phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL). Some molecules leave the cycle to create glucose, while other molecules remain in the cycle to replace RuBP.
Polysaccharides
Uses
starches (amylose/amylopectin)
energy storage in plants
glycogen (animal starch)
energy storage in animals
cellulose
plant cell walls
chitin
arthropodexoskeletons
The following diagram shows where these chemicals are needed in the Calvin-Benson cycle.
If you want to further explore the Calvin-Benson cycle, refer to “The Light-Independent Reactions of Photosynthesis” on pages 176 and 177 of the textbook. If you feel confident that you understand what is happening in the Calvin-Benson cycle, try answering the following Self-Check questions.
Biology 20 © 2008 Alberta Education