Personal
Psychology 20

Unit 4

xy
next oT EP

SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL
Fort Saskatchewan 780 992 0101
Sherwood Park 780 464 1899
Vegreville 780 632 7998

[von NAME:

a

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 4

Value

DR Part One: Multiple-Choice Items

Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the
question. Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item.

1. The stage is not a stage of psychosexual development.
A. anal
B. genital
C. phallic
D. puberty

2. This theorist believed that people must find a balance between the two major
choices given in each stage of development.

A. Carl Jung

B. Erik Erickson

C. Gordon Allport
D. Raymond Cattell

3. This is not one of the eight determinants of personality.

A. Genetics

B. Learning

C. Intelligence

D. Unconscious mechanisms

4. Survival of the fittest requires

protecting one’s family

using force to obtain a mate
adapting to one’s environment
being physically active and smart

DoOUPr

5. The guides the choices made by the :

id; ego
ego; id
ego; superego
superego; ego

vaom>

EE ——————————————E EEE EEE

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 1

Assignment Booklet 4 Personal Psychology 20

- may produce guilt in an individual.

eid

ego
super id
. superego

vow>

7. One of the major concepts behind Roger’s theory is

A. people want to better themselves

B. people want to select the best mate

C. dreams are useful in helping clients

D. client-centered therapy concerns the unconscious

8. A major criticism given to personality theories is that they are

A. based on mythology

B. proposed only by white males

C. difficult to prove scientifically

D. mostly based on stages of development

9. Operant conditioning involves

. reducing drives by satisfying needs

ignoring behaviours to make a person frustrated
using punishment to shape a person’s behaviour

. using reinforcement to shape a person’s behaviour

VOD

10. B.F. Skinner believed

A. people inherited some human behaviours

B. people who commit suicide have inferior genes

C. his theory regarding humans can be applied to other animals

D. humans must adapt to our environment or we will become exinct

2 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 4

11. Problems during anal or toilet-training stage of a child’s development could lead
to the child, later in life,

A. being rude and sarcastic

B. believing anything he or she is told

C. having relationship issues with members of the opposite gender

D. being too generous or too stingy with love, friendship, and possessions

12. The superego monitors

what the id desires

how the id’s needs are met by the ego

problems stemming from negative experiences in childhood

one’s concerns for personal pleasures, no matter the consequences

Save

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 3

Assignment Booklet 4

Value
10

Personal Psychology 20

Part Two: Matching Theory to Theorists

Choose the letter of the theorist with the phrase describing part of the theory he proposed.

Each theorist is referenced once.
Statements

1. All humans go through eight stages of
development.

2. All human behaviour is learned.

3. People have ability traits that determine how
people work toward and achieve goals.

ego, personal unconscious, and collective

unconscious.

changes to survive.

become better people.

and the superego

9. Eight main factors are involved in the
development of personality.

10. Numerous individual traits combine to make a

unique person.

4. People need to satisfy certain levels of needs.

5. The components of the personality include the

6. All creatures on earth go through evolutionary

7. Humans are basically good and always strive to

8. The human mind is composed of the id, the ego,

ae TOmmoawp

Terms

Abraham Maslow
B. F. Skinner
B.R. Hergenhahn
Carl Jung

Carl Rogers
Charles Darwin
Erik Erickson
Gordon Allport
Raymond Cattell
Sigmund Freud

ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 4

Value
10

Part Three: True or False

Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false. Write T or F in the
blanks to indicate your choices.

1.

2.

Stages in Erickson’s theory span the entire life of an individual.
Cattell attempted to develop a scientific way of determining personality.
Jung believed that a therapist was needed to find meaning in dreams.

Each stage in Erickson’s theory is based on problems created by a person’s
parents.

Regarding Maslow’s hierarchy, physiological needs must be met before any other
needs can be considered.

According to Erickson, “initiative vs guilt” occurs in the late childhood stage of
development.

According to Gordon Allport, traits may include intelligence, aggression,
shyness, and deception.

Freud believed that all adult problems stemmed from childhood.
Jungian theory is partly based on spirituality.

Maslow believed very few people attain self-actualization.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 C)

Assignment Booklet 4 Personal Psychology 20

Vamme Part Four: Written-Response Items
Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items.
2 1. How do you define personality?
5 2. Maslow outlined five criteria of self-actualizing people. List three of the five

criteria and explain why you think they are most important.

6 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 4

12

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 7

Select one of the following three options and complete the associated tasks.
Remember to enumerate (number) your responses on the response page so your marker
knows the item to which you are responding.

Option A: The “Big Five” Dimensions of Personality

Contemporary theories regarding personality development now include the “Big Five”
Dimensions of Personality. Each dimension is often represented on a scale or
continuum and is related to a grouping of traits. Scoring on one end of a given scale or
continuum is neither good nor bad, nor is scoring in the middle with a blend of traits
from both ends of the continuum. Conduct internet research regarding this theory then
answer the following two questions.

1. Provide the URL (web address) of two websites you used to gather your
information. (2 marks)

2. Describe each of the Big Five Dimensions, making sure to provide examples of
traits from each end of the spectrum or continuum. (10 marks)

or

Option B: Personality Tests — Extraversion or Introversion

Type the terms “introversion-extraversion personality test” into a search engine. Scan
the options available regarding such tests and select one. Read the 3 questions below
before completing the test as you will need to record specific information as part of
your assignment.

Deeg ie UIE Qe cic ede io tenia ce leuice, (| @4airide))

2. Take the test and include either a printed copy or a handwritten/typed record of
the result of your test. (4 marks)

3. Describe, with some detail, whether you believe the test does or does not
accurately describe this factor of your personality. (6 marks)

or

Assignment Booklet 4 Personal Psychology 20

Option C: Birth Order Influences

While some social scientists believe birth order is significant in the development of
personality, others do not hold such a view. Conduct research into the supposed effects
of birth order influences by entering the terms “birth order personality” into a search
engine, review a few of the links, then respond to the four questions/tasks below.

1. Provide at least two of the URLs (web addresses) of the internet sources you
referenced OR a bibliography of any other sources you used in this question. (2
marks)

2. Provide a list of at least three main traits for two of the four following
categories of children. Be sure to clearly indicate which three you have
selected from the list below. (6 marks)

e first born children e youngest or last born children
e middle children or second children © only child

3. State how many siblings you have (if any) and what position you occupy (if
applicable) in the birth order of your siblings. (1 mark)
4. Do you think the characteristics of your birth position (as indicated from your

research) are accurate or inaccurate? Provide a rationale for your response.
(3 marks)

My Option Selection is:

(Room for your response follows on pages 9 and 10.)

8 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 4

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 9

Assignment Booklet 4 Personal Psychology 20

End of Assignment Booklet 4
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

10 ADLC Personal Psychology 20
