Personal
Psychology 20

Unit 1

xy
next oT EP

SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL
Fort Saskatchewan 780 992 0101
Sherwood Park 780 464 1899
Vegreville 780 632 7998

[von NAME:

a

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 1

Value

20 Part One: Multiple-Choice Items

Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the
question. Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item.

1. Psychology is the study of
A. hypnosis
B. the human soul
C. human behaviour
D. subconscious thoughts

2. This group of helping professionals have medical degrees and can prescribe
medication.

A. Counsellors

B. Psychiatrists

C. Psychologists

D. Paraprofessionals

3. Research in this branch of psychology may involve the effects of hormones on
mood.

A. Social

B. Behavioural
C. Physiological
D. Developmental

4. Researchers in this field may study how infants learn to crawl.

A. Social

B. Behavioural
C. Physiological
D. Developmental

eee eee, Tee
ADLC Personal Psychology 20 1

Assignment Booklet 1 Personal Psychology 20

5. This branch of psychology may investigate the effects of overcrowding and its
relationship to stress.

A. Social

B. Behavioural
C. Physiological
D. Developmental

6. Researchers training monkeys to use sign language would be considered
psychologists.

A. social

B. behavioural
C. physiological
D. developmental

7. Researchers in this branch of psychology may study the phenomena of
remembering and forgetting.

A. Clinical

B. Cognitive

C. Abnormal

D. Parapsychology

8. These psychologists might conduct research into the causes of anxiety attacks
and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

A. Clinical

B. Cognitive

C. Abnormal

D. Parapsychology

9. A person in this field may look for energy traces/patterns of ghosts and
apparitions.

A. Clinical

B. Cognitive

C. Abnormal

D. Parapsychology

2 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 1

10. This type of psychologist might use group therapy to help people with addictions.

A. Clinical

B. Cognitive

C. Abnormal

D. Parapsychology

11. Generally speaking, children and intellectually disabled adults can’t be
hypnotized because they

A. do not trust others sufficiently

B. do not have any serious problems

C. are not as intelligent as healthy adults

D. are not able to focus and concentrate sufficiently

The Case Studies in this assignment are considered mini-experiments which involve human
behaviour. Case Studies A-D are summarized from Mindless Eating by Brian Wansink. Use
Case Study A to answer multiple-choice items 12 and 13.

Case Study A

Billy, a galley cook on a Navy ship, was facing daily complaints from the crew about the
lemon Jell-O™ he was serving. Because of an ordering error, lemon was the only flavour
of Jell-O purchased for consumption during the four-month exercise. There was no
cherry Jell-O™ and the crew was unhappy. Because the ship was not going to be in port
(land) for another two months, Billy had to act ina creative manner - he added red food
colouring to the lemon Jell-O™. When the red-coloured lemon Jell-O™ was served to
the sailors, no one complained.

12. The independent (or manipulated) variable in Case Study A is
A. sailors at sea
B. Jell-O™ colour
C. time away from port
D. satisfaction level of the sailors

13. The dependent (or responding) variable in Case Study A is

A. sailors at sea

B. Jell-O™ colour

C. time away from port

D. satisfaction level of the sailors

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 3

Assignment Booklet 1 Personal Psychology 20

Use Case Study B to answer multiple-choice items 14 and 15.

Case Study B

One hundred forty (140) male college students were asked to read a summary of a
fictitious date between Brad and Barb. The students were divided into two groups of
70 people each. The summary described going to a movie and gave much detail about
what Brad did on the date. The only difference in the descriptions that each group was
given related to the amount of popcorn Brad ate during the movie. In one version of
the summary Brad ate “a couple of handfuls” of his popcorn. In the other version Brad
ate “almost all" of his popcorn. Researchers asked the two groups of men how much
weight (in pounds) they thought Brad could bench press. Students who read that Brad
ate almost all of his popcorn imagined Brad lifting, on average, 21 more pounds than the
Brad who only ate a couple of handfuls of his popcorn.

14. The independent (or manipulated) variable in Case Study B is the

A. amount of popcorn Brad ate

B. amount of weight Brad was though to bench press

C. level of hunger Brad was experiencing during the movie
D. type of movie Brad was watching while eating the popcorn

15. The dependent (or responding) variable in Case Study B is

A. amount of popcorn Brad ate

B. amount of weight Brad was thought to bench press

C. level of hunger Brad was experiencing during the movie
D. type of movie Brad was watching while eating the popcorn

Please note, the course materials indicate that a control group is required in every
experiment. This is not correct. While all experiments have an experimental group, not all
experiments require a control group.

16. The difference between a control group and an experimental group is that the
group is exposed to the variable.

A. control; dependent

B. control; independent

C. experimental; dependent
D. experimental; independent

4 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 1

17. Which of the following experiments would require a control group?
A. Determining which gender moves their hands more when giving a speech.
B. Testing to see if mnemonics help people remember (memorize) grocery lists.
C. Investigating if healthy 5 year-old males have better balance than healthy 50
year-old males.
D. Exploring who has better hand-eye coordination, left-handed women or right-
handed women.

18. The formal term for a predicted outcome of an experiment is a(n)
A. theory
B. hypothesis

C. assumption
D. supposition

Use Case Study C to answer multiple-choice items 19 and 20.

Case Study C

A group of students starting university were treated to a movie and given
popcorn as part of their university orientation experience. Before the movie
began, the students were also offered jelly beans. Half of the students were
presented jelly beans in a tray divided into six sections. Each section contained
200 jelly beans of one flavour type. The other half of the students were
offered the jelly beans in a mixed container. There were still six flavours, but
they were not neatly separated from each other.

The researchers then calculated the average number of jelly beans taken by
individuals in the two groups. When the jelly beans were presented in the tray
with the different flavours separated from each other, students took an
average of 12 jelly beans. Students who were offered the disorganized
assortment took an average of 23 jelly beans. It appeared that mixing the
flavours nearly doubled the number of jelly beans consumed!

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 5

Assignment Booklet 1 Personal Psychology 20

20. The independent (manipulated) variable in Case Study C is the
. flavours of jelly beans
arrangement of jelly beans
number of jelly beans consumed
orientation of the university students

pow>

21. The dependent (responding) variable in Case Study C is the

. flavours of jelly beans

arrangement of jelly beans

number of jelly beans consumed

. orientation of the university students

DaOwD>

ll,
6 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 1

era Part Two: True or False

Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false. Write T or F in the
blanks to indicate your choices.

1. To be hypnotized, a person must have a disorder such as an addiction or chronic
pain.

2. You cannot easily observe covert behaviour.
3. Data collected in an experiment is called empirical evidence.

4. The unqualified use of hypnosis may disguise serious problems and delay proper
treatment.

5. The Canadian Council on Animal Care monitors all animal research that occurs
in Canada.

6. The Canadian Council on Animal Care can influence the research funding a
university receives from the government.

7. Developmental psychology is concerned with how humans evolved from the
apes.

8. Brushing your teeth after lunch is an abnormal behaviour.
9. Social psychology involves the influences people have on each other.

10. Extraneous factors add scientific merit to an experiment.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 7

Assignment Booklet 1 Personal Psychology 20

Value

17 Part Three: Written-Response Items

Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items.

3 1. What is an overt behaviour? Provide an original example.

3 2. | What is a covert behaviour? Provide an original example.

8 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 1

Use Case Study D to answer written-response items 3 and 4.

Case Study D

The same researchers for Case Study C decided to try an experiment using M&M's”
candy. With M&M's®, the taste of each piece of candy is the same regardless of the
colour of the piece. In this experiment, a group of students were given M4M's*® to
snack on while watching a video. Half of the students were given bowls that had 7
colours of candy while the remaining students were given bowls that had 10 colours of
M&M's®. Would the two groups eat significantly different amounts of candy?
Students who had 7 colours of M&M's ate an average of 56 pieces. Those who had 10
colours of candy ate an average of 99 pieces!

2 3. Explain why the researchers would need to use participants that liked chocolate and
who were not colour-blind.

2 4. The M&M’s® Case Study implies that increased variety can increase food
consumption. Provide one reason why a person might want to encourage increased
food consumption.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 9

Assignment Booklet 1 Personal Psychology 20

Use Case Study E to answer written-response items 5, 6, and 7.

Case Study E

Surgeries occur every minute of every day. Some operations require patients to
receive only local anaesthetic while others require patients to be under general
anaesthetic. Special doctors called anaesthesiologists must use patient data such as
age, mass (weight), and allergies in their calculations of how much general anaesthetic
to use for a given patient. The data from one study suggests that hair colour may also
help anaesthesiologists determine how much anaesthetic to use.

Researcher Daniel Sessler believes the gene that produces red pigment also produces
a hormone that increases pain sensitivity. He hypothesizes that people with red hair
feel pain more intensely than people with brown hair. To test this theory, Dr. Sessler
enlisted ten women with dark brown hair and ten women with red hair. He then gave
them a common anaesthetic gas followed by a mild electric shock. If a participant
twitched when shocked, the participant was given more anaesthetic until the reflex
stopped. If a participant did not twitch when shocked, the participant was given less
anaesthetic until she reacted. Results showed that the subjects with red hair needed
20% more anaesthetic than subjects with brown hair.

2 5. | What is the independent (manipulated) variable?

2 6. | What is the dependent (responding) variable?

10 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 1

3 7. The women in this study were aware they were going to be shocked. If dogs were used
instead of people, they would not understand they would not be severely or
permanently hurt. In your opinion, would it be acceptable to conduct a similar test on
dogs? Would it matter if the knowledge gained from the experiment would help
veterinarians perform surgery on dogs in the future? Explain.

End of Assignment Booklet 1
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 11
