Personal
Psychology 20

Unit 7

xy
next oT EP

SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL
Fort Saskatchewan 780 992 0101
Sherwood Park 780 464 1899
Vegreville 780 632 7998

[von NAME:

a

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

Value

» Part One: Multiple-Choice Items

Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the
question. Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item.

Point of clarification regarding sensation and perception:

Sensation refers to the process of receiving stimuli from the environment using one of the five
senses and then having that information forwarded to our brains for processing. Perception is
the processing and interpretation of the sensory stimuli we receive to better understand our
environment.

Use the following information to answer multiple-choice items 1 and 2.

Robert loves vegetables and after he eats his bowl of steamed broccoli with fresh butter and
sea salt, he decides that broccoli is his new favourite vegetable.

1. As Robert places a broccoli floret in his mouth, breathes in deeply, and begins to
chew, he is experiencing a(n)

illusion
sensation
perception

. hallucination

vop>

2. When Robert states that broccoli is his new favourite vegetable, this is due to his

. illusion
sensation
perception

. hallucination

voOwD>

3. ESP is

. the sixth sense

a visual illusion

not scientifically proven
. something everyone has

VOD

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 1

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

4. Eyes are designed to detect

A. colour

B. light waves

C. features of objects
D. electrical impulses

5. The pupil

expands in dim light
contracts in dim light
enlarges in bright light
does not change shape

Uap

6. The coloured part of the eye is called the

A. iris
B. lens
C. pupil
D. cornea

7. The dark centre of the eye is called the

A. iris
B. lens
C. pupil
D. cornea

8. The transparent covering at the front of the eye is called the

A. iris

B. lens
C. pupil
D. cornea

9. This part of the eye controls the size of the pupil

A. iris

B. lens

C. cornea

D. ciliary muscles

it

2 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

10. This part of the eye focuses the images we see

A. iris
B. lens
C. pupil
D. cornea

11. One colour is distinguished from another colour by its

. power
intensity
wavelength

. feature detectors

DOWD

12. Specialized cells called are concentrated mainly in the centre of the retina
and work

. rods; in dim light
cones; in dim light
tods; to detect colour

. cones; to detect colour

GaP

13. Specialized cells called are concentrated mainly around the edge of the
retina and work

. tods; in dim light
cones; in dim light
rods; to detect colour

. cones; to detect colour

vow>

14. The blind spot is caused by

the iris closing

colour blindness

a concentration of photoreceptors

. the space where the optic nerve leaves the eye

paow>

LLL
ADLC Personal Psychology 20 3

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

Point of clarification regarding cellular layers in the retina:

Page 113 incorrectly states that light first goes through the photoreceptor layer (rods and cones)
then the bipolar layer and finally the ganglion cell layer. What actually happens is that light
entering the eye passes through the ganglion cell layer then the plexiform and nuclear layers
(with bipolar cells) on its way to the photoreceptor layer where the rods and cones are located.
The rods and cones then activate and send signals back to the ganglion cells through the bipolar
cells.

15. Individuals with monochromatism see only in because their do not
function.

the three primary colours; rods

the three primary colours; cones
shades of white, grey, and black; rods
shades of white, grey, and black; cones

vow>

16. Individuals with protanopia perceive only shades of

red and blue
red and yellow
blue and yellow
. white and black

pOw>

17. Which set of colours are complementary?

A. red and green

B. blue and green

C. yellow and blue
D. purple and orange

18. When you mix two primary colours you get a

tint

shade

secondary colour
intermediate colour

Gaw>

Te a eae aay

4 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

20.

21.

22.

The cochlea helps to transmit vibration into neural impulses by

detecting features

absorbing sound waves

stimulating the auditory nerve
causing hairs on its surface to vibrate

GAD

Pheromones

. are hormones

have strong odours
signal sexual receptivity
. are only active in insects

VoOWD>

The placebo effect occurs when people report feeling

A. less pain when they have taken real medication

B. more pain when they have taken real medication

C. less pain when they have taken inactive (fake) medication
D. more pain when they have taken inactive (fake) medication
In the wild, is considered the most important sense.

A. smell

B. touch

C. vision

D. hearing

{ADIG|Perconall psychology,20\as 1s se eee te eae eee

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

Corrections to Course Content Regarding the Five Senses

. ind spot

e Sight: The diagram on page 113 incorrectly
indicates that the blind spot is located in the vitreous
humour at the back of the eye just in front of the :
retina. The blind spot is actually located where the /* .

: : : ‘ ptic nerve
optic nerve enters/exits the retina.

e Sound: The diagram on page 125 depicts sound waves as transverse waves (like light
waves) with high and low points (crests and troughs) in the waves. Sound, in fact, is a
longitudinal wave. A correct diagram of longitudinal waves formed when a tuning fork
is struck near a pipe with air in it is as follows:

of

\ ft

Areas of Compression

o The distance between two consecutive areas of compression (wave cycles)
determines the pitch of the sound wave. Long distances between compressions
result a lower pitch (lower frequency). Shorter distances between compression
result in a higher pitch (higher frequency). Frequency is the number of
compressions (wave cycles) in a given time period.

o The number of air molecules disturbed or compacted in a compression area
relates to the sound pressure of a sound wave. The pressure (also known as
amplitude) relates to the loudness or quietness of a sound. Without molecules
(air, water, etc.) to transmit the energy (pressure) of a sound wave, there is no
audible sound. In other words, if a hammer strikes a metal bar in a container that
has had all the air removed (i.e., a vacuum), you would not hear anything.

e Taste & Smell: The course materials correctly identify that taste and smell are
intimately entwined and function together to enhance the experience of eating. On page
126, however, the materials identify four basic tastes: sour, salty, sweet, and bitter.
There is actually a fifth basic taste called umami. The word umami is borrowed from the
Japanese culture and is translated as “pleasant savory taste.” Ripe tomatoes are thought
to be rich in umami flavour!

e Touch: This sense includes pain, temperature (hot and cold), as well as pressure. There
are two typographical errors on page 128 that substitute “pleasure” for “pressure.”
Please note the correct term is pressure.

6 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

vame Part Two: Matching — The Auditory System

Choose the letter of the term that best describes the concept or completes the sentence. Terms
may not be used more than once.

Statements Terms
1. This is term refers to the strength, pressure, or A. amplitude
“loudness” of a sound wave. B. anvil
C. auditory cortex
2. This is the outer shell of the ear. D. auditory nerve
E. cochlea
3. This structure transfers auditory information to F. frequency
the brain. G. hammer
H. pinna
4. This curled tube-like structure contains fluid. I. stirrup
J. tympanic membrane

5. This is the first of three tiny bones in the inner
ear that relay vibrations from the external
environment.

6. This refers to the number of compressions in a
given time period.

7. Vibrations from the hammer are relayed to this
tiny bone in the inner ear.

8. This area receives and translates auditory
information.

9. This blocks and protects the delicate bones of the
inner ear from the external world.

10. This structure transfers vibrations to the cochlea.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 7

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

vave Part Three: True or False

Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false. Write T or F in the
blanks to indicate your choices.

1. Colour blindness is genetic.

2. All animals have colour vision because colour is used to attract mates.

3. A tertiary colour is a combination of a primary colour and a secondary colour.
4. People with hearing loss may not realize their hearing has deteriorated.

5. Taste buds are only located on the edges of the tongue but taste buds respond to
all tastes to varying degrees.

6. People with brain injuries that result in a loss of smell may then also experience a
loss of taste.

7. Some parts of our skin have more sensory touch receptors than other parts of our
skin.

8. Water droplets can act like prisms and separate light into many colours.
9. Humans attend to sound only in one ear.

10. When you add black to a colour you get a tint.

8 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

Value
25

Part Four: Written-Response Items

Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items.

Addition Information Regarding Optical Illusions

Mechanisms that create optical illusions are located in various places along the visual
pathways. Some of these mechanisms come from the retina itself, but most result from the way
that the images captured with the eyes are reconstructed by the visual cortex.

The information our brain receives from our eyes doesn’t always accurately represent reality.
For example, some of the information received from the 125 million photoreceptors is lost as
the information flows to 100 times fewer ganglion cells before being transmitted to the brain
by the optic nerve.

To compensate for the loss of information, the brain introduces abstract factors that complete
or amplify the components of reality that are transmitted. In doing so, the brain sometimes
creates an impression of unity/logic where there is none—in other words, an optical illusion.
There are many types of optical illusions including those related to depth, colour, motion, and
size. The written-response items 1 and 2 relate to optical illusions.

1. Below is an optical illusion. Hold your head still and move this page to the left then
right and describe what you see.

NATL
UTE ACE

ite

ILE

Te

MAU

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 9

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

y 2. Describe what you see in the optical illusion below.

e949
ce

1 3. | What is the name of the taste sensation (basic taste) with a Japanese name?

Pe 4. | What happens if you plug your nose and eat an apple?

10 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

2 5. | How does the mind compensate when experiencing sensory deprivation?
2 6. | How does the mind compensate when experiencing sensory overload?
14 7. Select one of the following two options on the following pages and complete the

associated tasks. Remember to enumerate (number) your responses on the response
page for Option A so your marker knows the item to which you are responding.
Responses for Option B may be provided within the Option itself.

———————————————————————————————————————————
11

ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

Option A: Hot and Cold

As you have learned, the cutaneous sense (touch) involves pressure, pain, and
temperature. For this option you may need to conduct internet (or other) research and
you will conduct a short experiment regarding temperature. You will need three tall
glasses (identical glasses if possible), water of varying temperatures, and a
clock/watch/timer to time yourself. Once you have the materials, complete the
following steps in the order they appear then answer the written-response items that
follow in the space provided on page 14:

Steps:

e Fill one glass with ice water (very cold), fill one glass with room-temperature water
(you can leave the glass of water on a table for a few hours to reach room
temperature), and fill one glass with very hot water (not boiling).

e Grasp the glass of hot water with one hand, making sure the palm of your hand is
touching the glass.

e Grasp the glass of ice water with your other hand, making sure the palm of your
hand is touching the glass.

e Hold the glasses (hot water in one hand, ice water in the other) for 60 seconds.

e After 60 seconds, grasp the room-temperature glass with both hands, palms
touching the glass.

1. Describe, with some detail, the sensations of touching the room-temperature
glass after holding the other two glasses for 60 seconds. (4 marks)

2. What is the commonly used temperature scale in Canada called? (1 mark)

3. What is the commonly used temperature scale in the United States called?
(1 mark)

4. What is the average body temperature of an adult in the temperature scale used
in Canada? (2 marks)

5. Assessing a patient’s temperature is part of a full physical examination.
Besides taking a rectal (anal) reading of temperature, list two other sites that
may be used for measuring temperature. (2 marks)

6. Body temperature fluctuates slightly. For a person who sleeps at night and
stays awake during the day (no night/shift workers), at what time of day is body
temperature the lowest? Be specific for full marks. (2 marks)

7. At what time of day is body temperature highest for a person who sleeps at
night and stays awake during the day? Be specific for full marks. (2 marks)

or

Gt

12 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 7

Option B: Do You Hear what I Hear?

There are different types of hearing loss. Hearing loss may result from a tumor, from
trauma to the ear, or even from noise. Exposure to noise is often measured in decibels.
Conduct research (internet or otherwise), regarding noise produced from common
activities and then complete the tasks that follow. You may respond on this page.

Sound levels in decibels (dB)

f
t 1. Above what decibel level is sound considered dangerous? (2 marks)
[475 2. The thermometer diagram on the left goes from 0 decibels to over 175
A _ decibels. Find three coloured pencils (red, yellow, green) or three
i highlighters (pink, yellow, green), and show, by colouring the thermometer,
i 150 the range of decibels that is safe (green), the range of decibels that is
i borderline (yellow), and the range of decibels that is considered dangerous
By) F (red/pink). (3 marks)
[125 3. On the left side of the thermometer are letters A-G. Correctly match the letter
Cc | to the sound it represents. (7 marks)
100 Rock concert or ambulance
E 12-gage shotgun
DB [- Busy city traffic
L7 Whisper
E L Softest sound heard
50 ______ Typical speech
LE Fireworks/firecrackers
(25 4. What is tinnitus? (2 marks)
FY
Gl Fo
a

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 13

Assignment Booklet 7 Personal Psychology 20

(Response Area for Option A.)

End of Assignment Booklet 7
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

seer rs nn nse Ss i Se NT
14 ADLC Personal Psychology 20
