Personal
Psychology 20

Unit 2

xy
next oT EP

SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL
Fort Saskatchewan 780 992 0101
Sherwood Park 780 464 1899
Vegreville 780 632 7998

[von NAME:

a

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 2

Value
17

Part One: Multiple-Choice Items

Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the
question. Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item.

i

In the stage of development, language is at a rudimentary level.

A. 1* (prenatal)
B. 2"4 (infancy)
C. 3" (early childhood
D. 4" (late childhood)

Stage 7 (middle age), according to the course materials, has an age range between
A. 30-50
B. 35-55

C. 40-60
D. 45-65

Use the information below to answer multiple-choice item 3.

brain).

Ifa child is kept in a dark room for the first five years of life, he or she may never see even if
he or she was born with properly functioning eyes and a healthy visual cortex (part of the

Sh

whereby the visual system

The time span of five years is an example of
must be or else it will cease to function.
A. a teratogen; exposed

B. prehension; irradiated

C. acritical period; stimulated

D. stage 3 (early childhood); activated

With descriptive research, the researcher influence the participants and
make an inference as to what might cause the observed behaviours.

A. does; does

B. does; does not

C. does not; does

D. does not; does not

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 1

Assignment Booklet 2 Personal Psychology 20

5. What type of study design would be most appropriate to investigate if people’s
problem-solving abilities increase as they age?

A. Historical

B. Normative

C. Longitudinal
D. Cross-sectional

6. What type of study design would be most appropriate to determine if lying was a
genetically inherited trait?

A. Twin

B. Historical

C. Correlational
D. Cross-sectional

8. What type of study design would be most appropriate to determine if the.reported
cases of birth defects have decreased over the last century?

A. Historical

B. Normative

C. Longitudinal
D. Cross-sectional

8. What type of study design would be most appropriate to determine if boys in
three age categories have denser bones than girls in the same age categories?

A. Twin

B. Historical

C. Correlational
D. Cross-sectional

9. What type of study design would be most appropriate to determine when most
children learn to walk?

A. Historical

B. Normative

C. Longitudinal
D. Cross-sectional

2 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 2

Use the information below to answer multiple-choice item 10.

A set of identical twins are separated at birth. As adults the twins are reunited and studied by
researchers. The researchers learn that one twin is much more aggressive than the other.

10. Using their knowledge of identical twins, the researchers theorize that the
difference in aggressiveness is due to

. genetic differences

environmental factors

which twin was born first

. how old the twins were when reunited

DOWD

11. When a sperm cell fertilizes and egg cell, the resulting cluster of cells is called
a(n) for the first weeks after fertilization.

. zygote; two
zygote; eight
embryo; two

. embryo; eight

vaw>

12. The results of a(n) is more because the doctor must interpret and
determine the relevance of certain facial expressions.

A. Prechtl Test; objective

B. Prechtl Test; subjective
C. Apgar Exam; objective
D. Apgar Exam; subjective

Use the information below to answer multiple-choice item 13.

A doctor uses the Apgar exam to assess a newborn. The infant is rated a zero on stimulus
response, a one on muscle tone, and the best rating in the rest of the categories.

13. This infant would have an overall rating of
five
six
seven
eight

Gow

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 3

Assignment Booklet 2 Personal Psychology 20

14. The Brazelton scale is a comprehensive and time consuming neonatal test
because the test assesses a baby’s behaviours such as sucking and

. organized; crying

repetitive ; sleeping
controlled; breathing

. coordinated; thermoregulation

vow>

Use the information below to answer multiple-choice items 15 and 16.

Robbie is two years-old when his parents purchase a one month old Pomeranian dog. This is
the first dog Robbie is introduced to and when his parents call the Pomeranian “doggie,”
Robbie calls the next five small furry four-legged animals he sees, “doggie.”

15. By calling the next five small furry four-legged animals he sees, “doggie,”
Robbie is experiencing

. overextension
underextension

. overgeneralization
. undergeneralization

DOw>

16. Robbie is then introduced to an adult St. Bernard dog. He does not call this dog
“doggie” which means he is experiencing

. overextension
underextension
overgeneralization

. undergeneralization

vaAw>

17. While stereotypes may be positive or negative, they are all images or ideas
regarding a particular type of person or thing.

. neutral
unbiased

. complicated

. oversimplified

Dam>

4 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20

Value
10

Assignment Booklet 2

Part Two: Matching Teratogen to Effect

In the blank beside each statement, place the letter of the term (teratogen) that best describes
the effect. Terms may not be used more than once and not all terms will be used. Please note
the category of teratogen in the statement when responding.

10.

Statements

Consumption of this therapeutic drug may
increase the likelihood of heart defects.

Hearing loss is one potential effect of this
therapeutic drug.

Exposure to this environmental hazard may
cause anemia.

Discoloration of teeth is common with this
therapeutic drug.

Exposure to this environmental hazard may
result in poor motor coordination.

Respiratory problems may occur in newborns
whose mothers have used this therapeutic drug.

Leukemia, genetic alterations, and cancer may
result because of exposure to this environmental
hazard.

Excessive and continued use of this substance by
the mother may result in brain damage, growth
retardation, and mental retardation.

This infection in the mother may cause eye
damage, hearing loss, and heart defects in the
newborn.

Deformed limbs are a common effect of this
therapeutic drug.

OZEr Asay DOmmoOWP

Terms

alcohol
barbiturates
gold

herpes

lead
mercury
nicotine (smoking)
phenytoin
PCB*
radiation
rubella
streptomycin
syphilis
tetracycline
thalidomide

* PCB

polychlorinated biphenyl

ADLC Personal Psychology2000

Assignment Booklet 2 Personal Psychology 20

vane Part Three: True or False

Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false. Write T or F in the
blanks to indicate your choices.

1. Ina healthy newborn, the last sense to fully mature is taste.
2. At first, babies recognize their parents by their voices and smell, not by sight.
3. Correlations are relationships that exist between two factors/variables.

4. Normative studies judge a child as being either normal or abnormal with respect
to an average child.

5. Cognitive language theorists believe that children learn the meaning of words
through classification and categorization.

6. Social inferences are the sets of steps a child must follow when performing a
given behaviour.

7. Prehension relates to a baby’s grasping reflex.
8. Modelling is a way parents encourage a child’s proper use of words.
9. Punishment is the main influence on a child’s social development.

10. Motor development proceeds in a toe-to-head fashion.

6 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 2

Value

B Part Four: Written-Response Items

Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items.

4 1. How do longitudinal studies differ from cross-sectional studies?
2 2. What is the palmar reflex?
2 3. The course materials describe three methods of defining temperament. Select one of

the methods and list the areas that are assessed.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 7

Assignment Booklet 2 Personal Psychology 20

3 4. The following are some stereotypes you may have heard before:

- Asian people are smart (e.g., good at math).

- Blondes are dumb.

- Teenagers are not trustworthy.

- Jewish people are frugal.

- Albertans (especially oil-field/rig-workers) are “red-necks.”

Provide two additional examples of stereotypes that you have heard or might hold.
Examples may include references to people in your geographical area, culture, or age
group and/or they may include stereotypes of Americans, Canadians, Ukrainians,
Caucasians, Francophones, etc.

2 5. Using one of your examples from question four, explain why the stereotype could not
possibly apply to all the members of the group.

End of Assignment Booklet 2
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

8 ADLC Personal Psychology 20
