Personal
Psychology 20

Unit 3

xy
next oT EP

SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL
Fort Saskatchewan 780 992 0101
Sherwood Park 780 464 1899
Vegreville 780 632 7998

[von NAME:

a

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 3

Value

16 Part One: Multiple-Choice Items

Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the
question. Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item.

1. According to Cattell, the two major types of intelligence are

. valid and reliable

fluid and crystallized
mathematical and verbal

. mental and chronological

yvow>

2. Which test provides an indicator of child’s emotional well-being?

A. CogAT

B. WISC-III

C. Standford-Binet
D. Draw-A-Person test

3. Which of the following is not one of Gardner’s multiple intelligences?

A. Social

B. Musical

C. Intrapersonal

D. Logical-mathematical

4. An IQ score measures

a person’s intelligence

a person’s intellectual qualities

whether a person is gifted or developmentally delayed
how well a person has performed on an intelligence test

Yow>

5. A test’s validity is how well the test

measures intelligence

can predict future behaviour

can identify “gifted” children

measure what it is supposed to measure

vom>

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 1

Assignment Booklet 3

Personal Psychology 20

6. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised is used to

10.

7

determine a child’s reading level

B. identify children who should advance a grade

c

Dz

identify people with communication difficulties
determine a deaf child’s understanding of words

Which of the following does not make up part of the Triarchic Theory of
Intelligence?

yvowD>

. The way a person generates intelligent behaviour

The way a person visualizes solutions to problems
The degree to which person’s behaviour suits the situation

. The person’s ability to analyze and apply appropriate behaviours in novel

situations within a small time frame

The Weschler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III)

vow

assess musical ability

gives a full-scale IQ score

is a group intelligence test
measures intelligence in babies

Intelligence tests often favour

SaeP

boys from poor families

girls from a variety of backgrounds
children from third-world countries

white children from middle-class families

Earl Hunt was interested in

VaOw>

. developing culture-fair IQ tests

correlations between IQ scores and family income
the unique methods people used to solve problems

. the common methods people used to solve problems

ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 3

11. An IQ score of 100 means the
score is average
score is below average
score is above average
person taking the test answered all questions correctly

GCaAwP>

12. Sternberg believes

A. there are seven different intelligences

B. the higher the IQ score, the smarter the person

C. how people use their intelligence is most important

D. crystallized and fluid intelligence are equally important

13. The zone of proximal development is the difference between

A. IQ scores as a child ages

B. achild’s mathematical and verbal scores

C. the IQ scores of a developmentally delayed child and a gifted child
D. what a child can do on his/her own and what he/she can do with help

14. On average, a child will score higher on an intelligence test if he or she

is an orphan

has many siblings

is the youngest in the family

is the older of two children in a family

Vow>

15. According to Cattell, the type of intelligence a person is born with is
intelligence.

fluid
naturalistic
crystallized
chronological

GAS

16. IQ is determined by your then multiplying by 100.

A. dividing; mental age by your chronological age
B. dividing; chronological age by your mental age
C. multiplying; mental age with your chronological age
D. subtracting; chronological age from your mental age

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 3

Assignment Booklet 3 Personal Psychology 20

a Part Two: Matching — Gardner’s Intelligences

Choose the letter of the intelligence that is being described in each scenario. Terms may be
used more than once.

Statements Terms
1. Olivia smoothly parallel parks her car between A. bodily-kinesthetic
two trucks on a city street. B. existential
C. interpersonal
2. Athena believes we are born to serve others. D. intrapersonal
E. linguistic
3. Dianna loves to complete crossword puzzles in F. logical-mathematical
her spare time. G. musical
H. naturalist
4. Jeffery enjoys his gymnastics classes. I spatial

5. Neil determines how much money he can invest
at the end of the month after paying his rent,
utilities, and grocery expenses.

6. Austin practices identifying flowers types while
hiking in Banff.

7. Mackenzie realizes she gets emotional at
weddings and funerals so she always brings
tissues to these events.

8. Payton calculates the degree to which the main
girder of the third section of the new bridge is to
be sloped to resist the stress from the horizontal
beam.

9. Beth and Ben work as mediators between groups
that are in contract negotiations.

10. Emily plays the flute, piano, and clarinet.

4 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 3

Value Part Three: True or False
Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false. Write T or F in the
blanks to indicate your choices.
i TT Se
_____2._- The misuse of intelligence test can lead to labelling/stereotyping.
______ 3. The number of years you have been alive is your mental age.
Geis Stee cin ie ioees coe
______ 5. Determining intelligence strictly on IQ scores has become widely criticized.
_____ 6. ‘Children taking the WISC-III may be asked to solve math problems orally.
____ 7. Bias has been eliminated from IQ tests.

vame Part Four: Written-Response Items
Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items.

4 1. List four factors that could affect a person’s results on an intelligence test.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 is}

Assignment Booklet 3 Personal Psychology 20

4 2. Of Gardner’s Intelligences, which two do you think are your strongest? Explain.
2 3. According to Cattell, what are “street smarts?”
3 4. Using the internet, a dictionary, a knowledgeable friend, etc., define “idiot savant” and

provide an example.

6 ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Personal Psychology 20 Assignment Booklet 3

4 5. | Weassess the capabilities of people every day, sometimes consciously, sometimes
subconsciously. Take a moment and think of the people you interact with regularly.
Who do you consider to be intelligent? How did you come to this conclusion?

In a paragraph or two, detail how you determine someone to be intelligent — list a few
characteristics you assess intelligent people to have.

End of Assignment Booklet 3
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

ADLC Personal Psychology 20 7
