ALBERTA  DISTANCE  LEARNING  CENTRE
SSN2171
Personal Psychology 20  KEY

Assignment Booklet 4
Student’s Questions and
Comments
For Student use only For ADLC USE ONLY

 (If label is missing or incorrect)
File Number:

Assigned to

City/Town               Province           Postal Code

  Address:

Name:

Apply Assignment Label Here

Marked by--

Date Received:

Summary

Possible
Marks
Your
Marks
%
Part One
12

Part Two
10

Part Three
10
Part Four
19

TOTAL
51

Teacher’s Comments

       Teacher’s Signature
Revised January 2015

CANADIAN CATALOGUING IN PUBLICATION DATA

SSN2171
Personal Psychology 20
Assignment Booklet Package
Copyright © 2014 Alberta Distance Learning Centre
4601 - 63 Avenue
Barrhead, Alberta, Canada  T7N 1P4

Permission has been obtained from Distributed Learning Resources Branch to revise this
material.

All rights reserved.  No part of this courseware may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise – without written permission from Alberta Distance Learning Centre.

Printed in Canada

Alberta Distance Learning Centre has made every effort to acknowledge original sources and to
comply with copyright law.  If errors or omissions are noted, please contact Alberta Distance
Learning Centre so that necessary amendments can be made.

For Users of Alberta Distance Learning Centre Courseware

Much time and effort involved in preparing learning materials and activities that meet curricular
expectations as determined by Alberta Education.  We ask that you respect our work by
honouring copyright regulations.

Personal Psychology 20

©
Thinkstock

Assignment Booklet 4

Instructions for Submitting Assignment Booklets

1. Submit Assignment Booklets regularly for correction.
2. Submit only one Assignment Booklet at one time. This allows your teacher to
provide helpful comments that you can apply to subsequent course work and
exams (if applicable).
3. Check the following before submitting each Assignment Booklet:
a. Are all assignments complete?
b. Have you edited your work to ensure accuracy of information and details?
c. Have you proofread your work to ensure correct grammar, spelling, and
punctuation?
d. Did you complete the Assignment Booklet cover and attach the correct label?

Postal Mail
Determine sufficient postage by having the envelope weighed at a post office.
(Envelopes less than two centimetres thick receive the most economical rate.)

Alternate Methods
Contact your teacher if you require an alternate method for submission of assignments.

Personal Psychology 20
Assignment Booklet 4
Assessment

For successful completion of this course, you must

1.

Complete all questions in each Assignment Booklet to the best of your ability.

2.

Achieve at least 40% on the final exam.

3. Achieve a final course mark of at least 50%.

Process
•
Read the course material
 before working on the activities in this Assignment
Booklet.  The Module Book contains the information necessary for successful
completion of your work.

•
Proceed carefully
through each assignment.  Reflect upon your answers and prepare
your written responses to communicate your thoughts effectively.  Time spent in
planning results in better writing.

•
Proofread your work
 before submitting it for marking.  Check for content,
organization, paragraph construction (if applicable), grammar, spelling, and
punctuation.

•
If you encounter difficulties or have any questions
, contact your course teacher at
Alberta Distance Learning Centre for assistance.

Format
If you choose to
 use a word processor
for your written work,
• format your work using an easy-to-read 12-point serif font such as Times New Roman
• include your full name and student file number as a document header
• double-space your final copy
• staple your printed work to this Assignment Booklet

Assignment Booklet 4  Personal Psychology 20
6  ADLC General Psychology 20

Avoid plagiarism
 by acknowledging all sources you use.  Contact your teacher if you are
  uncertain how to document sources.

  Although you are encouraged to work collaboratively and discuss various aspects of this
  course with others,
all submitted work must be your own
.

Our Pledge to Students

Alberta Distance Learning Centre is committed to helping students achieve their educational goals.
We look forward to assisting students who are sincere in their desire to learn.  Students may contact
their course teacher(s) by phone, e-mail, fax, postal mail, or in person at an Alberta Distance Learning
Centre office.

Barrhead

Calgary

4601 - 63 Avenue 341 - 58 Avenue SE
Barrhead, Alberta  T7N 1P4 Calgary, Alberta  T2H 0P3
Phone 780-674-5333 Phone 403-290-0977
Toll-free 1-866-774-5333 Toll-free 1-866-774-5333, ext. 6200
Fax 1-866-674-6977 Fax 403-290-0978

Edmonton

Lethbridge

300 HSBC Building Professional Building
10055 - 106 Street  NW 712 – 4
th
 Avenue South
Edmonton, Alberta  T5J 2Y5 Lethbridge, Alberta  T1J 0N8
Phone 780-452-4655 Phone 403-327-2160
Toll-free 1-866-774-5333, ext. 6100 Toll-free 1-866-774-5333, ext. 6300
Fax 780-427-3850 Fax 403-327-2710

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 4

ADLC Personal Psychology 20  1

Value
 12
Part One:  Multiple-Choice Items

Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the
question.  Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item.

 _D__ 1. The _____ stage is not a stage of psychosexual development.

 p56  A.  anal
   B.  genital
   C.  phallic
   D.  puberty

 _B__ 2. This theorist believed that people must find a balance between the two major
choices given in each stage of development.

 p60  A.  Carl Jung
   B.  Erik Erickson
   C.  Gordon Allport
   D.  Raymond Cattell

 _C__ 3. This is not one of the eight determinants of personality.

 p54  A.  Genetics
   B.  Learning
   C.  Intelligence
   D.  Unconscious mechanisms

 _C__ 4. Survival of the fittest requires

 p66  A.  protecting one’s family
   B.  using force to obtain a mate
   C.  adapting to one’s environment
   D.  being physically active and smart

 _D__ 5. The _____ guides the choices made by the _____.

 p55  A.  id; ego
   B.  ego; id
   C.  ego; superego
   D.  superego; ego

Assignment Booklet 4  Personal Psychology 20
2  ADLC Personal Psychology 20

_D__ 6. The _____ may produce guilt in an individual.

 p55  A.  id
   B.  ego
   C.  super id
   D.  superego

 _A__ 7. One of the major concepts behind Roger’s theory is

 p68  A.  people want to better themselves
   B.  people want to select the best mate
   C.  dreams are useful in helping clients
   D.  client-centered therapy concerns the unconscious

 _C__ 8. A major criticism given to personality theories is that they are

 p53  A.  based on mythology
   B.  proposed only by white males
   C.  difficult to prove scientifically
   D.  mostly based on stages of development

 _D__ 9. Operant conditioning involves

 p66  A.  reducing drives by satisfying needs
   B.  ignoring behaviours to make a person frustrated
   C.  using punishment to shape a person’s behaviour
   D.  using reinforcement to shape a person’s behaviour

 _C__ 10. B.F. Skinner believed

 p66  A.  people inherited some human behaviours
   B.  people who commit suicide have inferior genes
   C.  his theory regarding humans can be applied to other animals
   D.  humans must adapt to our environment or we will become exinct

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 4

ADLC Personal Psychology 20  3

 _D__ 11. Problems during anal or toilet-training stage of a child’s development could lead
to the child, later in life,

 p56  A.  being rude and sarcastic
   B.  believing anything he or she is told
   C.  having relationship issues with members of the opposite gender
   D.  being too generous or too stingy with love, friendship, and possessions

 _B__ 12. The superego monitors

 p55  A.  what the id desires
   B.  how the id’s needs are met by the ego
   C.  problems stemming from negative experiences in childhood
   D.  one’s concerns for personal pleasures, no matter the consequences

Assignment Booklet 4  Personal Psychology 20
4  ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Value
10
Part Two:  Matching Theory to Theorists

Choose the letter of the theorist with the phrase describing part of the theory he proposed.
Each theorist is referenced once.

Statements

Terms
 _G__ 1. All humans go through eight stages of
development.
A.   Abraham Maslow
 p60  B.   B. F. Skinner
    C.   B.R. Hergenhahn
 _B__ 2. All human behaviour is learned. D.   Carl Jung
 p65   E.   Carl Rogers
 _I__ 3. People have ability traits that determine how
people work toward and achieve goals.
F.   Charles Darwin
 p64  G.   Erik Erickson
    H.   Gordon Allport
 _A__ 4. People need to satisfy certain levels of needs. I.   Raymond Cattell
 p69   J.   Sigmund Freud
 _D__ 5. The components of the personality include the
ego, personal unconscious, and collective
unconscious.

 p58

 _F__ 6. All creatures on earth go through evolutionary
changes to survive.

 p66

 _E__ 7. Humans are basically good and always strive to
become better people.

 p68

 _J__ 8. The human mind is composed of the id, the ego,
and the superego

 p55

 _C__ 9. Eight main factors are involved in the
development of personality.

 p54

 _H_
p62
10. Numerous individual traits combine to make a
unique person.

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 4

ADLC Personal Psychology 20  5

Value
10
Part Three:  True or False

Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false.  Write T or F in the
blanks to indicate your choices.

 _T__ 1. Stages in Erickson’s theory span the entire life of an individual.
 p61
 _T__ 2. Cattell attempted to develop a scientific way of determining personality.
 p64
 _F__ 3. Jung believed that a therapist was needed to find meaning in dreams.
 p59
 _F__ 4. Each stage in Erickson’s theory is based on problems created by a person’s
parents.  p60

 _T__ 5. Regarding Maslow’s hierarchy, physiological needs must be met before any other
needs can be considered.  p69

 _F__ 6. According to Erickson, “initiative vs guilt” occurs in the late childhood stage of
development.  p60

 _T__ 7. According to Gordon Allport, traits may include intelligence, aggression,
shyness, and deception.  p63

 _T__ 8. Freud believed that all adult problems stemmed from childhood.
 p56
 _T__ 9. Jungian theory is partly based on spirituality.
 p59
 _T_ 10. Maslow believed very few people attain self-actualization.
 p70

Assignment Booklet 4  Personal Psychology 20
6  ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Value
19
Part Four:  Written-Response Items

Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items.

2
1. How do you define personality?

Answers will vary.  Accept any reasonable response for full marks.

5
2. Maslow outlined five criteria of self-actualizing people.  List three of the five
criteria and explain why you think they are most important.

p71
Criteria = 3 marks, explanation = 2 marks.

1.  The ability to perceive reality accurately and fully.

2.  The ability to accept one’s self and others without judgement.

3.  The ability to be concerned with problems that do not involve themselves.

4.  Being creative.

5.  Having a strong ethical sense.

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 4

ADLC Personal Psychology 20  7

12
3. Select one of the following three options and complete the associated tasks.
Remember to enumerate (number) your responses on the response page so your marker
knows the item to which you are responding.

--------------------------------------

Option A:  The “Big Five” Dimensions of Personality
Contemporary theories regarding personality development now include the “Big Five”
Dimensions of Personality.  Each dimension is often represented on a scale or
continuum and is related to a grouping of traits.  Scoring on one end of a given scale or
continuum is neither good nor bad, nor is scoring in the middle with a blend of traits
from both ends of the continuum.  Conduct internet research regarding this theory then
answer the following two questions.

1. Provide the URL (web address) of two websites you used to gather your
information.   (2 marks)

2. Describe each of the Big Five Dimensions, making sure to provide examples of
traits from each end of the spectrum or continuum.  (10 marks)

------------------- or -------------------

Option B:  Personality Tests – Extraversion or Introversion
Type the terms “introversion-extraversion personality test” into a search engine.  Scan
the options available regarding such tests and select one.  Read the 3 questions below
before completing the test as you will need to record specific information as part of
your assignment.

1. Provide the URL (web address) of the test you have selected.   (2 marks)

2. Take the test and include either a printed copy or a handwritten/typed record of
the result of your test.  (4 marks)

3. Describe, with some detail, whether you believe the test does or does not
accurately describe this factor of your personality.  (6 marks)

------------------- or -------------------

Assignment Booklet 4  Personal Psychology 20
8  ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Option C:  Birth Order Influences
While some social scientists believe birth order is significant in the development of
personality, others do not hold such a view.  Conduct research into the supposed effects
of birth order influences by entering the terms “birth order personality” into a search
engine, review a few of the links, then respond to the four questions/tasks below.

1. Provide at least two of the URLs (web addresses) of the internet sources you
referenced OR a bibliography of any other sources you used in this question.  (2
marks)

2. Provide a list of at least three main traits for two of the four following
categories of children.  Be sure to clearly indicate which three you have
selected from the list below.  (6 marks)

 first born children

 youngest or last born children
 middle children or second children  only child

3. State how many siblings you have (if any) and what position you occupy (if
applicable) in the birth order of your siblings.  (1 mark)

4. Do you think the characteristics of your birth position (as indicated from your
research) are accurate or inaccurate?  Provide a rationale for your response.
(3 marks)

My Option Selection is:  _______________________________

(Room for your response follows on pages 9 and 10.)

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 4

ADLC Personal Psychology 20  9

Option A:  The Big Five

1.  Full marks for URL if it is referenced & working.  Half marks if URL doesn’t work.

2.  Openness:  traits such as cautious, conforming, and consistent on one end of the

     spectrum and inventive, curious, and creative on the other end.

     Conscientiousness:  easy-going, careless, spontaneous on one end of the spectrum

     and efficient, organized, and detail-oriented on the other end.

     Extroversion:  solitary and reserved on one end of the spectrum and outgoing and

    energetic on the other end.

     Agreeableness:  cold, unkind, and single-minded on one end of the spectrum and

     friendly and compassionate on the other end.

     Neuroticism:  secure, confident and stable on one end of the spectrum and nervous,

     sensitive, and vulnerable on the other end.

Option B:  Extraversion or Introversion Quiz

1.  Full marks for URL if it is referenced & working.  Half marks if URL doesn’t work.

2.  Full marks if student has provided results.

3.  Answers will vary.  Award full marks if sufficient detail is provided.

Assignment Booklet 4  Personal Psychology 20
10  ADLC Personal Psychology 20

Option C:  Birth Order Influences

1.  Give one mark for each URL that is properly referenced or working.  Give full

    marks for other sources if referenced in proper format; give half marks if

   information is missing from the references.

2.  Answers will vary.  Be flexible when grading.  Think of synonyms.  Two marks

     per category.

Category Traits
First born
Reliable, conscientious, perfectionistic,
responsible, conservative, driven, authoritarian,
structured, cautious, controlling
Middle/second
Peacemaker, negotiator, creative, independent,
peer-focused, attuned to needs of others,
competitive, people pleasers, rebellious
Last/youngest
Comical, entertaining, social, relaxed, dependent,
creative, unconventional, spoiled, fun-loving,
uncomplicated, manipulative, outgoing, self-
centered, attention-seeking
Only
See first born; likes being centre of attention,
difficulty sharing, mature for age

3.  Answers will vary.  Accept most anything.

4.  Answers will vary.  Give full marks for responses that have sufficient support or

     reasoning relating to the student’s position.

End of Assignment Booklet 4
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

Alberta Distance Learning Centre
4601 – 63 Avenue (Box 4000)
Barrhead, Alberta  T7N 1P4
adlc.ca
1-866-744-5333
info@adlc.ca
Revised January 2015
