ALBERTA  DISTANCE  LEARNING  CENTRE 
SSN2171 
Personal Psychology 20  KEY 
 
Assignment Booklet 3 
Student’s Questions and 
Comments 
For Student use only For ADLC USE ONLY 
 
  
 (If label is missing or incorrect) 
File Number: 
 
  
Assigned to 
 
 
 
        
City/Town               Province           Postal Code
 
  Address:
 
Name:
 
Apply Assignment Label Here
 
 
Marked by 
 
 
 
Date Received: 
 
 
 
Summary 
 
Possible 
Marks 
Your 
Marks 
% 
Part One 
16 
  
Part Two 
10 
  
Part Three 
7   
Part Four 
17 
  
TOTAL 
50 
  
 
 
Teacher’s Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Teacher’s Signature 
Revised January 2015 

 
 
 
CANADIAN CATALOGUING IN PUBLICATION DATA
 
 
 
SSN2171 
Personal Psychology 20 
Assignment Booklet Package 
Copyright © 2014 Alberta Distance Learning Centre 
4601 - 63 Avenue 
Barrhead, Alberta, Canada  T7N 1P4
 
 
Permission has been obtained from Distributed Learning Resources Branch to revise this 
material. 
 
All rights reserved.  No part of this courseware may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted in any form or by any means – electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or otherwise – without written permission from Alberta Distance Learning Centre. 
 
Printed in Canada 
 
Alberta Distance Learning Centre has made every effort to acknowledge original sources and to 
comply with copyright law.  If errors or omissions are noted, please contact Alberta Distance 
Learning Centre so that necessary amendments can be made. 
 
For Users of Alberta Distance Learning Centre Courseware
 
Much time and effort involved in preparing learning materials and activities that meet curricular 
expectations as determined by Alberta Education.  We ask that you respect our work by 
honouring copyright regulations.
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Personal Psychology 20 
 
 
 
©
Thinkstock
 
 
 
Assignment Booklet 3 
 
 
  

 
 
Instructions for Submitting Assignment Booklets 
 
1. Submit Assignment Booklets regularly for correction. 
2. Submit only one Assignment Booklet at one time. This allows your teacher to 
provide helpful comments that you can apply to subsequent course work and 
exams (if applicable). 
3. Check the following before submitting each Assignment Booklet: 
a. Are all assignments complete? 
b. Have you edited your work to ensure accuracy of information and details? 
c. Have you proofread your work to ensure correct grammar, spelling, and 
punctuation? 
d. Did you complete the Assignment Booklet cover and attach the correct label? 
 
 
Postal Mail 
Determine sufficient postage by having the envelope weighed at a post office. 
(Envelopes less than two centimetres thick receive the most economical rate.) 
 
 
Alternate Methods 
Contact your teacher if you require an alternate method for submission of assignments. 

 
 
Personal Psychology 20 
Assignment Booklet 3 
Assessment 
  
For successful completion of this course, you must
 
1.
 
Complete all questions in each Assignment Booklet to the best of your ability. 
 
 
2.
 
Achieve at least 40% on the final exam. 
 
3. Achieve a final course mark of at least 50%.
 
 
 
Process 
• 
Read the course material
 before working on the activities in this Assignment 
Booklet.  The Module Book contains the information necessary for successful 
completion of your work. 
 
• 
Proceed carefully 
through each assignment.  Reflect upon your answers and prepare 
your written responses to communicate your thoughts effectively.  Time spent in 
planning results in better writing. 
 
• 
Proofread your work
 before submitting it for marking.  Check for content, 
organization, paragraph construction (if applicable), grammar, spelling, and 
punctuation. 
 
• 
If you encounter difficulties or have any questions
, contact your course teacher at 
Alberta Distance Learning Centre for assistance. 
 
Format 
If you choose to
 use a word processor 
for your written work, 
• format your work using an easy-to-read 12-point serif font such as Times New Roman 
• include your full name and student file number as a document header 
• double-space your final copy 
• staple your printed work to this Assignment Booklet 

Assignment Booklet 3  Personal Psychology 20 
6  ADLC General Psychology 20 
 
 
  
Avoid plagiarism
 by acknowledging all sources you use.  Contact your teacher if you are  
  uncertain how to document sources. 
 
  Although you are encouraged to work collaboratively and discuss various aspects of this  
  course with others, 
all submitted work must be your own
. 
 
 
 
Our Pledge to Students 
 
Alberta Distance Learning Centre is committed to helping students achieve their educational goals.   
We look forward to assisting students who are sincere in their desire to learn.  Students may contact  
their course teacher(s) by phone, e-mail, fax, postal mail, or in person at an Alberta Distance Learning 
Centre office. 
 
Barrhead
 
Calgary
 
4601 - 63 Avenue 341 - 58 Avenue SE 
Barrhead, Alberta  T7N 1P4 Calgary, Alberta  T2H 0P3 
Phone 780-674-5333 Phone 403-290-0977 
Toll-free 1-866-774-5333 Toll-free 1-866-774-5333, ext. 6200 
Fax 1-866-674-6977 Fax 403-290-0978 
 
Edmonton
 
Lethbridge
 
300 HSBC Building Professional Building 
10055 - 106 Street  NW 712 – 4
th
 Avenue South 
Edmonton, Alberta  T5J 2Y5 Lethbridge, Alberta  T1J 0N8 
Phone 780-452-4655 Phone 403-327-2160 
Toll-free 1-866-774-5333, ext. 6100 Toll-free 1-866-774-5333, ext. 6300 
Fax 780-427-3850 Fax 403-327-2710

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 3 
 
ADLC Personal Psychology 20  1 
 
Value 
 16 
Part One:  Multiple-Choice Items 
 
 
Read each item carefully and decide which choice best completes the statement or answers the 
question.  Write the letter of your choice in the blank before the item. 
 
 _B__ 1. According to Cattell, the two major types of intelligence are 
    
 p47  A.  valid and reliable 
   B.  fluid and crystallized 
   C.  mathematical and verbal 
   D.  mental and chronological 
    
 
 _D__ 2. Which test provides an indicator of child’s emotional well-being? 
    
 p49  A.  CogAT 
   B.  WISC-III 
   C.  Standford-Binet 
   D.  Draw-A-Person test 
    
 
 _A__ 3. Which of the following is not one of Gardner’s multiple intelligences? 
    
 p46  A.  Social 
   B.  Musical 
   C.  Intrapersonal 
   D.  Logical-mathematical 
    
 
 _D__ 4. An IQ score measures 
    
 p44  A.  a person’s intelligence 
   B.  a person’s intellectual qualities 
   C.  whether a person is gifted or developmentally delayed 
   D.  how well a person has performed on an intelligence test 
    
 
 _D__ 5. A test’s validity is how well the test 
    
 p138  A.  measures intelligence 
Glossary  B.  can predict future behaviour 
   C.  can identify “gifted” children 
   D.  measure what it is supposed to measure 
 
 
   
  

Assignment Booklet 3  Personal Psychology 20 
2  ADLC Personal Psychology 20 
 
 
 
_C__ 6. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised is used to  
    
 p49  A.  determine a child’s reading level 
   B.  identify children who should advance a grade 
   C.  identify people with communication difficulties  
   D.  determine a deaf child’s understanding of words 
    
 
 _B__ 7. Which of the following does not make up part of the Triarchic Theory of 
Intelligence? 
    
 p45  A.  The way a person generates intelligent behaviour  
   B.  The way a person visualizes solutions to problems 
   C.  The degree to which person’s behaviour suits the situation 
   D.  The person’s ability to analyze and apply appropriate behaviours in novel    
      situations within a small time frame 
    
 
 _B__ 8. The Weschler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-III)  
    
 p48  A.  assess musical ability 
   B.  gives a full-scale IQ score 
   C.  is a group intelligence test 
   D.  measures intelligence in babies 
    
 
 _D__ 9. Intelligence tests often favour 
    
 p50  A.  boys from poor families 
   B.  girls from a variety of backgrounds 
   C.  children from third-world countries 
   D.  white children from middle-class families 
 
 
   
 __C_ 10. Earl Hunt was interested in  
    
 p46  A.  developing culture-fair IQ tests 
   B.  correlations between IQ scores and family income   
   C.  the unique methods people used to solve problems 
   D.  the common methods people used to solve problems 
 
 
   
  

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 3 
 
ADLC Personal Psychology 20  3 
 
 _A__ 11. An IQ score of 100 means the  
    
 p44  A.  score is average 
   B.  score is below average 
   C.  score is above average 
   D.  person taking the test answered all questions correctly 
 
 
   
 _C__ 12. Sternberg believes 
    
 p45  A.  there are seven different intelligences 
   B.  the higher the IQ score, the smarter the person 
   C.  how people use their intelligence is most important 
   D.  crystallized and fluid intelligence are equally important 
    
 
 _D__ 13. The zone of proximal development is the difference between 
    
 p47  A.  IQ scores as a child ages 
   B.  a child’s mathematical and verbal scores  
   C.  the IQ scores of a developmentally delayed child and a gifted child 
   D.  what a child can do on his/her own and what he/she can do with help 
 
 
  
 
 _D__ 14. On average, a child will score higher on an intelligence test if he or she  
    
 p52  A.  is an orphan 
   B.  has many siblings 
   C.  is the youngest in the family 
   D.  is the older of two children in a family 
 
 
  
 
 _A__ 15. According to Cattell, the type of intelligence a person is born with is_____ 
intelligence. 
    
 p47  A.  fluid 
   B.  naturalistic 
   C.  crystallized  
   D.  chronological 
 
 
  
 
 _A__ 16. IQ is determined by _____ your _____ then multiplying by 100.   
    
 p44  A.  dividing; mental age by your chronological age 
   B.  dividing; chronological age by your mental age 
   C.  multiplying; mental age with your chronological age 
   D.  subtracting; chronological age from your mental age  

Assignment Booklet 3  Personal Psychology 20 
4  ADLC Personal Psychology 20 
 
 
Value 
10 
Part Two:  Matching – Gardner’s Intelligences 
 
 
Choose the letter of the intelligence that is being described in each scenario.  Terms may be 
used more than once. 
 
   
Statements 
 
Terms 
 __I__ 1. Olivia smoothly parallel parks her car between 
two trucks on a city street. 
A.   bodily-kinesthetic 
   B.   existential 
p46    C.   interpersonal 
 _B__ 2. Athena believes we are born to serve others. D.   intrapersonal 
    E.   linguistic 
 _E__ 3. Dianna loves to complete crossword puzzles in 
her spare time. 
F.   logical-mathematical 
   G.   musical 
    H.   naturalist 
 _A__ 4. Jeffery enjoys his gymnastics classes. I.   spatial 
      
 _F__ 5. Neil determines how much money he can invest 
at the end of the month after paying his rent, 
utilities, and grocery expenses. 
  
     
     
      
 _H__ 6. Austin practices identifying flowers types while 
hiking in Banff. 
  
     
      
 _D__ 7. Mackenzie realizes she gets emotional at 
weddings and funerals so she always brings 
tissues to these events. 
  
     
     
     
 _F__ 8. Payton calculates the degree to which the main 
girder of the third section of the new bridge is to 
be sloped to resist the stress from the horizontal 
beam. 
 
    
    
     
 _C__ 9. Beth and Ben work as mediators between groups 
that are in contract negotiations.  
 
    
    
 _G_ 10. Emily plays the flute, piano, and clarinet.  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 3 
 
ADLC Personal Psychology 20  5 
 
Value 
7 
Part Three:  True or False 
 
 
Read each item carefully and decide if the statement is true or false.  Write T or F in the 
blanks to indicate your choices. 
 
 _F__ 1. The Flynn Effect refers to IQ decreasing with age. 
 p52   
 __T_ 2. The misuse of intelligence test can lead to labelling/stereotyping. 
 p51   
 _F__ 3. The number of years you have been alive is your mental age.  
 p44   
 _T__ 4. You can study for an intelligence test. 
 p51   
 _T__ 5. Determining intelligence strictly on IQ scores has become widely criticized. 
 p44   
 _T__ 6. Children taking the WISC-III may be asked to solve math problems orally. 
 p48   
 _F__ 7. Bias has been eliminated from IQ tests. 
 p50   
 
 
 
 
 
Value 
17 
Part Four:  Written-Response Items 
 
 
Respond to the following items on the blanks below the items. 
 
4 
1. List four factors that could affect a person’s results on an intelligence test. 
  
  
 
 
p51  
Answers will vary.   Accept reasonable responses such as the following: 
 
  
- experiencing culture bias in the test, coming from a disadvantage home (poverty) 
 
  
- being tired, being hungry, being sick, being stressed, having had a recent tragedy 
 
  
- being emotionally moody, etc. 
 
 
 
  

Assignment Booklet 3  Personal Psychology 20 
6  ADLC Personal Psychology 20 
 
 
4 
2. Of Gardner’s Intelligences, which two do you think are your strongest?  Explain.  
 
  
 
 
p46  
Answers will vary.  Accept any reasonable response provide an explanation is given. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2 
3. According to Cattell, what are “street smarts?”   
 
  
 
 
p47  
Street smarts refer to the type of intelligence not learned in school; it is the intelligence 
 
  
a person is born with. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3 
4. Using the internet, a dictionary, a knowledgeable friend, etc., define “idiot savant” and 
provide an example. 
 
  
 
 
  
An idiot savant is an intellectually challenged person (lower intelligence) who has 
 
  
exceptional skill or brilliance is some limited field.  Examples will vary, but accept 
 
  
most musical, mathematical, etc. examples students give.   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

Personal Psychology 20  Assignment Booklet 3 
 
ADLC Personal Psychology 20  7 
 
 
4 
5. We assess the capabilities of people every day, sometimes consciously, sometimes 
subconsciously.  Take a moment and think of the people you interact with regularly.  
Who do you consider to be intelligent?  How did you come to this conclusion?   
 
In a paragraph or two, detail how you determine someone to be intelligent – list a few 
characteristics you assess intelligent people to have.  
 
  
 
 
  
Answers will vary.  Give full marks for responses that highlight 2-3 
 
  
areas/characteristics. 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
End of Assignment Booklet 3 
After you have completed all items, submit your work to your marker.

Alberta Distance Learning Centre
4601 – 63 Avenue (Box 4000)
Barrhead, Alberta  T7N 1P4
adlc.ca
1-866-744-5333
info@adlc.ca
Revised January 2015
