22

Summary

So Lesson | draws to a close. Were you overwhelmed by the amount of material and
the number of different ideas presented? Don’t dismay! You will likely find future
lessons less hectic. If you have managed to understand the main ideas in the lesson
notes and are ready to tackle some assignments, congratulations on your endurance!

To summarize:

¢ Psychology is the science of human behaviour.

¢ The goals of psychology are to observe and record facts, to explain data,
and to make reasonable predictions about future behaviour.

¢ The first laboratory started by Wilhelm Wundt gave psychology status and
recognition as a science.

¢ Sigmund Freud recognized the importance of the unconscious mind and
studied it through hypnosis, free association, and dream interpretation.

¢ Freud believed the personality was composed of three main areas—the id,
the ego, and the superego.

* Carl Jung popularized the terms introvert and extravert; he believed
people have both a personal and a collective unconscious.

¢ The Behaviourists believed it was only valid to measure outward,
observable behaviour; a person is programmed by responding to a certain
stimulus.

« Abraham Maslow was a Humanist who described a pyramid of human
needs.

¢ Aneclectic view takes bits and pieces from a number of theories.

* Sleep and dreams are both important in order to be healthy.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 1 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

SECTION Two

Learning aud Cognitive Processes

Lesson 1: The Principles of Learning

Overview

You have been learning all your life-since the moment you were born. So what’s there
to find out about learning?

Lesson | will focus on these topics:

¢ What is Learning?

* Learning Begin With Me — Self-concept, Motivation, and Attitudes
* The Process of Learning

¢ Significant Factors in Learning

* Basic Principles of Efficient Learning

¢ The Power of Personal Learning Styles

* Human Development: What is Learning? What is Maturation?
¢ The Basic Theories of Piaget

« A Mixture of Reinforcement, Reward and Punishment

¢ Classical Conditioning and Operant Conditioning

* Mind Mapping Skills

¢« A Road Map to Improve Your Reading

¢ Efficiency Begins With Your Own Study Habits

¢ Top Students Reveal These Secrets To Success

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 23

===
reflex —a
response that
occurs
automatically
without any
learning

learning —
mastering
information or
skills that
increase one’s
competence

informal learning
— gathering
information
through contacts
with others,
leisure interests

formal learning —
gathering
information
through school
studies and other
structured
lectures

perceptual
learning —
acquiring
physical skills

affective learning
— gaining an
understanding
about feelings
and emotions

cognitive
learning
thinking, problem
solving, and
processing
information in
creative ways

ae

What is Learning?

Human beings are born learners. Learning begins as soon as the newborn enters our
fascinating new world and continues until death ends the learning process. The road to
learning may bring joy or even ecstasy. On the other hand, learning may be marked with
confusion, pain and hard work.

Learning, then, forms a tremendous part of our lives. Let’s define what is not considered
learning. Reflex is a behaviour that is not learned. It is a simple automatic response
involving a part of the body. A reflex action does not require previous learning or practise.
For example, a reflex action is the response of a baby curling and unclenching its hand.
Another example of a reflex action is putting out one’s hands to break the impact of a fall.

Let’s get back to the question: What is learning? |.ecarning means acquiring the ability to
respond in a competent manner to a situation. When learning occurs, our behaviour is
modified through experience. Learning involves mastering information or skills that will help
us react successfully to our environment. Learning begins with something human beings have
in abundance when they are born—curiosity. Learning means gathering information from
family members, friends, music, and movies. That is informal learning. Most people think of
formal! learning situations when learning is mentioned. Formal learning comes to us through
reading books, listening to classroom lectures, watching documentary videos, or taking
tennis lessons from a qualified instructor.

There are three broad categories of learning.
Perceptual motor learning involves the acquisition
of physical skills like riding a bicycle, going downhill
on skis, or doing a somersault. An individual must do
two things in this learning situation—accurately
perceive the skill, and implement the action that is
required. For example, to tie a bow, you must be able
to see the series of hand movements involved, and
then get your own hands to follow the correct
movement pattern. The second type of learning is
alfective learning which involves feelings and
emotions. Our values, biases, likes, dislikes, social
tules, and appropriate ways of behaving toward others
are all included. Affective learning is a vital part of our
humanness and our sociability. Cognitive learning is
school learning. It covers thinking, problem solving
and other creative processes of the mind.

24 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

From birth onward, much of our education involves learning to adapt ourselves to our
particular environment. First, we must learn to adapt our behaviour to be acceptable to our
parents and family members. In time, we learn the important lessons of adjusting our
behaviour to fit the expectations of a wide circle of family, friends and acquaintances in our
society.

Learning involves a number of complex processes that occur to make both knowledge
and skills remembered and stored in our brains. But learning also involves an impetus
from the learner to engage in the fascinating process of learning. Let’s begin with the
learner. How is a learner “created”?

Learning Begins With Me — Self-Concept, Motivation, & Attitudes

ee
positive self-
concept — having
a confident,
successful image
of oneself

— Oe

(0) aa
negative self-
concept — having
feelings of
inferiority and
self doubt about
abilities

ee <<<((0)>>

Knowledge

Skills Abilities
Processes

Self-Concept

How well we learn depends a great deal on our self-concept. We evaluate the world
and its meaning in terms of how we see ourselves. We try to behave in a manner which
is consistent with the way we view ourselves. Studies have shown that students who
receive good grades and who are successful all-round students are those who have
confidence in their overall ability and in their ability as students. Such students have a
positive self-concept. They require fewer favourable evaluations from others since they
know their own worth as individual human beings.

Unsuccessful students have negative attitudes about themselves. They see themselves
as less able, less adequate and less self-reliant than their successful peers. Since they see
themselves as inferior, they believe that others regard them in the same manner. Many
students feel separated from society. Therefore, they do poorly in school because they
feel school is irrelevant to their needs. Many young people are handicapped throughout
their lives by feelings of inferiority that they picked up in their learning experiences.
This negative self-concept can strongly influence everything they ever attempt. Thus
our capacity for learning is affected by our knowledge of our personalities, our abilities,
and our limitations.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 25

While we can appreciate the fact that humans are greatly influenced by the emotional
tone of the learning situation, so are animals! An experiment conducted on a group of
rats brought to light some startling results. It is important to remember that all rats in the
experiment were of average intelligence and ability. First the rats were randomly
divided into two groups. The experimenters were told that one group of rats were
exceptionally intelligent and superior. They were instructed that the other rats were dull
and stupid. The rats that were labelled superior were handled and responded to as if
they were special. These rats showed superior ability in the tests that were conducted.
In contrast, the rats that had been labelled stupid did very poorly. The manner in which
the rats were handled made quite a difference in the amount of learning accomplished
in each group. Thus the process of labelling established far different expectations for
the two groups with correspondingly different results. What implications does this have
for parents, teachers, bosses, and anyone else who guides, directs, and inspires the
actions of others?

Motivation

Motivation is concerned with the why of behaviour.
It is a complex topic, but the key question relating to
motivation is, “What’s in it for me?” Educators are
especially interested in the motivational aspect of
learning. If a teacher understands why students
learn, this knowledge can be used to motivate the
students toward greater learning. Generally
speaking, we learn best when:

* weare interested
* we have the desire and intention to learn
¢ the material is meaningful to us

* wecan relate and apply the material to our
own lives

Thus motivation is one of the most important keys to learning. It is doubtful if we
would learn unless we are impelled by a need, or faced with a problem, or lured by a
reward. Moreover, increasing the motivation usually enhances the learning. If we are
not “naturally” motivated to participate in some activity, the motivation or interest must
be created. You become an active learner in your search for knowledge which gives
you personal power in a number of ways. You now have energy to meet many new
challenges in your life.

26 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Attitudes

When you are faced with the challenge of learning new information, your most
valuable asset for success is a positive attitude. The attitudes we acquire through
childhood experiences have a strong effect on our behaviours throughout life. Early
experiences influence and determine how later experiences will be interpreted. The
direct and subtle messages we get from our family about what we can and can’t
accomplish are the foundation for establishing attitudes.

When we enter school we formally learn subject matter. However, the attitudes which
we have learned informally will have a far more lasting influence. The biggest barrier to
progress is fear of failure, embarrassment, and rejection.

Thinking like a winner makes a person a winner. You can overcome many of the
barriers you face by providing yourself with positive messages. Self-talk (which means
silently coaching yourself) can help you accomplish many tasks that you initially
thought were impossible. Before you were three years old, you succeeded in doing two
of the most difficult tasks you will ever face—walking and talking. If you watch young
children tackle both of those jobs, you will see that small failures, like falling down
don’t stop them for a minute.

We may not have control over every learning situation we enter, but we can make a
conscious decision about whether we are going to think about it positively or
negatively. That decision will determine the outcome more than almost any factor.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 27

— =
saturation —
being completely
full, unable to
hold any more

— =O

The Process of Learning

Learning progress is slow at first because the learner is just entering a new area of skills and
concepts. You can certainly identify with that notion when you think back to the first time
you attempted a skill or began studying a new topic. You may have been afraid, bewildered,
and frustrated all at the same time.

Then the rate of learning speeds up as the learner gets comfortable with the learning
material. Finally, the learning process slows down when the learner reaches mastery;
previous learning is consolidated and refined in the final stage. The learner reaches a point of
saturation after absorbing a great deal of content on a particular topic. They become very
knowledgeable.

28 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

—
plateau —a
period of little or
no progress in
learning

ee <<((0))>

The Learning Curve and Plateaus

Graphs show that one’s progress in learning can be quite irregular. On a certain day an
individual might not have a good learning record for a variety of reasons. The learning path
itself is not smooth. Some concepts make connections quickly and smoothly, others take
longer. Sometimes the learner may not be able to give full concentration to the material at
hand for one reason or another. A plateau is a period of little or no noticeable progress in
learning. A great deal of learning may occur both before and after the plateau. Plateaus are
temporary standstills in the learning process. Sometimes a rest period may be helpful. A
person may forget bad habits after taking a break from the learning material. A plateau can
be the stepping stone to future learning.

A Learning Plateau A General Learning Curve
Plateau
= i \
2
3 9
fe] os
a Ss
c
sg
&
E
2
=
Weeks of Production Practice Time

Plateaus occur for a number of reasons. The learner becomes bored or loses interest after
the initial excitement of a new topic. The learner may make a change in the earlier work or
study procedures which may cause them to lose ground in learning progress for a while. Ifa
learner does not have a good background in the original concepts, a plateau will likely
occur. Anxiety in the learning situation will cause tension which may lead to a plateau.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 29

(0) ca
transfer — the
affect of previous
learning on later
learning or
performance

positive transfer
prior learning is
helpful to
learning that
occurs later

ee <<((0)>

Significant Factors in Learning
Efficiency is certainly a familiar theme in our lives. Listen to these words of wisdom.

A Stitch in time saves nine.
A penny saved is a penny earned.
Waste not, want not.

Learning is a complex task and there are a number of variables interacting with each
other all at once. An understanding of key learning components gives you, the student,
an opportunity to use them to your advantage. Learning efficiency should be a special
concern of every student. Efficiency means better results with less effort. Who wants to
spend hour upon hour studying when one can economize? Let’s take a closer look at
some of the components in the learning process.

Transfer

Transfer has definite value in learning efficiently. Will
learning in one area transfer to learning in other topics?
‘Transfer means the effect of previous learning on
later learning or performance. If the prior learning is
helpful to later learning, positive transfer has
occurred. For example, Heidi learned proper

typing skills on an electric typewriter Later Heidi did
a computer program and had to type certain commands and
responses on the keyboard. Her earlier learning in typing classes was helpful.

A special kind of positive transfer is simulation. A simulation is an imitation of a
certain exercise or set of skills that is very similar in nature to a real life situation. Real
life conditions are duplicated to give the individual close to first-hand experience.
Simulations are used for the purpose of training or experimentation. For example, in
prenatal classes Mr. and Mrs. Leiberg learned how to handle, bath, feed and diaper a
life-sized doll so they will be prepared to care for their own baby when it arrives.
Another example: the astronauts simulate their space procedures by working with
training materials and shuttle control panels before they are launched into space.

Transfer occurs because of close associations between stimuli
and responses. As stimuli become more and more similar to
each other, the amount of transfer will increase. For example,
if you have a certain kind of computer at home and one that is
very similar at school or work, then you will have little
trouble in changing from one to the other. Transfer will be
high. The highest positive transfer occurs when stimuli and
responses of two tasks or situations are identical.

30 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

(0) aaa
negative transfer
prior learning
interferes with
learning that

occurs later

overlearning
continued
learning until
complete mastery
of the material
occurs

— =e

==
diminishing
returns — extra
study time does
not produce extra
gains in learning

massed practice —
learning sessions
that occur in one
entire unit of time

— =e

But all is not positive when it comes to transfer. If the prior learning interferes with later
learning, negative transfer has occurred. For example, Mario learned to drive a car
with an automatic gear shift. Then he was in a situation where he had to drive his
brother’s truck with a standard, on-the-floor gear shift. He had trouble learning how to
get the truck moving smoothly and shift gears using a clutch. This is an example of
negative transfer.

Overlearning

When we have learned a skill or a piece of information
but continue to practise until we acquire complete
mastery, we are overlearning. Overlearning has both
advantages and disadvantages. If we simply learn
something to the point where we barely know it, rapid
forgetting will occur. The reason for that happening is that
the information is not firmly anchored in the memory.
That’s what happens when students “cram” just before an
exam. For example, you may have learned a poem just in
time for the school concert. One month later you cannot
remember most of the lines because you did not overlearn
the material. So an advantage of using overlearning is that
the learner masters the material.

However, at a certain point, overlearning reaches a maximum when the learner can
understand and explain the material without mistakes or hesitations. Once the learner
knows the material thoroughly, any extra time spent reviewing this body of knowledge
is time wasted. A name for this situation is diminishing returns. Extra studying does
not lead to extra gains in learning. For example, if a high school math teacher decided
to review the addition of whole numbers, that lesson would involve overlearning
because students would be bored with a presentation of information that is very familiar
to them.

Massed and Distributed Practice

As the name suggests, massed practice refers to practice sessions in a learning
situation that occur in one great, ongoing mass of time. Massed practice allows the
learner to be exposed to the entire unit of learning at one time. In complex learning
where seeing relationships is important, massed practice will have a real advantage.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 31

ae
distributed

practice —
learning sessions
separated by rest
periods

ae

Massed practice also has some disadvantages. Efficiency will decline as the learner
becomes fatigued after a certain time. Also, the learner may become bored after a long
session. If the material is very complex or there is too much material, then massed practice
cannot be used because the learner would be too overwhelmed with data. An example of a
massed practice session would be taking a one-day seminar or a nonstop weekend
workshop on a particular topic.

Distributed practice involves a type of learning schedule in which sessions are separated
by rest periods. Distributed practice is most useful when the learner must make use of
physical skills or motor skills. Distributed practice allows the individual to master learning in
asmall area of a skill. This gives confidence and motivation to conquer another area of skills
in a subsequent distributed practice.

One disadvantage may be that forgetting of previously learned material will sometimes occur
between sessions. If practice sessions are spaced over an extended period of time, the
learner may become bored because of repetition and overlap. For example, if an individual
takes tennis lessons twice a week over a ten week period, that person is learning through
distributed practice.

32 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=
serial learning —
material is
learned in a
definite order or
sequence

primacy effect —
first items in the
learning sequence
are remembered
most clearly

recency effect —
last items in the
learning sequence
are remembered
best
—=iO

Serial Learning

Serial learning refers to the situation where the individual learns a series of responses
in a definite order or sequence. When the individual masters the serial learning material,
then each item becomes a connection or a stimulus for the appearance of the next item
because the items are arranged in a prescribed sequence. The first and last items in the
series are learned more easily because they occupy a special position.

The primacy effect refers to the fact that the first few items are learned the most
thoroughly. This is also linked to the idea that first impressions of something have quite a
dramatic impact.

The recency effect means the last items on the list are the next easiest to learn. For
example, we can remember the last task we had to do when cleaning the house or the
garage. We have the best recall of the last science definition we learned.

The remainder of the items in the middle of the series are learned with the greatest difficulty
of all. They seem to have no special significance. It may be wise to keep this information in
mind the next time you are scheduled for a job interview. If you have a choice, try to get the
first or the final interview.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 33

ey
mnemonic devices
—memory aids
like jingles or
catchwords

=e

a=
latent learning
learning that
takes place
without full

y that is
happening

ae

aware:

Mnemonic Devices

\Vinemonic devices are memory aids that help the learner remember certain facts. They
may appear in the form of formulas, catchwords, or jingles. These techniques encode
material to be learned so that they trigger one’s memory and the entire package of material
is recalled. Here is acommon example.

Thirty days hath September

April, June and November;

All the rest have thirty-one
Except February which stands alone.

Here is another little rule that is frequently useful:

“ee

“i” before “e” except after

Students can be creative and devise whatever mnemonic device or memory hook is useful
to anchor the material they are learning. The disadvantage of mnemonic devices is that
students spend too much time trying to make up a trick for remembering a piece of
information, and they don’t really understand the basic ideas in the material itself.

Latent Learning

The word latent means hidden; present but not visible; concealed. Latent learning is
information that becomes evident only when it is being used. Latent learning is learning that
takes place without reinforcement or maybe without complete awareness that the
information is being filed in our memories. However, when reinforcement is given, the
information is recalled. For example, a teacher gives a lesson on safety in the wilderness.
One of the students in the class does not give the information much attention.. But later
when a similar real life problem occurs, he suddenly remembers what was said in the
classroom lecture.

34 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

(0) ca
trial and error — a
learning
approach which
involves trying
various solutions
until the correct
one is found

— ee

Learning by Insight

Learning by insight is based on previous experience that is suddenly pieced together in
the mind. A sudden connection of relationships or components to an answer come
together and the solution appears. When insight occurs, the learner has made many
connections between relationships. The final link which brings the person to a solution
happens after the person quietly ponders a number of different possibilities. For
example, you may slave over a math equation for several minutes. Then you take a
closer look at something you have scribbled beside the equation as a possible solution.
Your doodles cause you to take your thinking one step beyond your current stage of
thinking and the correct answer falls into place.

Trial and Error Learning

Sometimes learning occurs in a very unstructured manner. |'rial and error learning is
defined as an attempt to solve a problem by trying various alternatives until the right solution
is found. Sometimes trial and error learning is necessary. But the disadvantage is that a lot of
time is wasted until the learner stumbles upon the correct answer. It is time consuming and
also can be very frustrating The learners must devise ways of keeping track of discarded
possibilities so they don’t start going in circles and repeating mistakes.

Mazes are used in experimental work on trial and error learning. A maze is a large box with
a series of pathways or hallways. One path is the correct path; other pathways lead to a
blind alley or a dead end.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 35

—[ =
natural
association — a
collection of items
are more easily
remembered if
they naturally
belong together
—=—i

Natural Association

Natural association in learning is sometimes called “belonging” since it implies that
one thing seems to belong with another. This group of objects—knives, forks, spoons,
plates, cups and saucers—would be more easily remembered as a list of words or
collection of items than would— planes, violets, rivers, oranges, pencils, and
telephones—which have no easily seen connection.

\

YA
wa

Related to the idea of natural association is the notion that we begin with ideas or concepts
we know and build hooks or anchors from the new information to the data that has already
been successfully stored in our minds. That process builds a bridge between known
information and new information that is relatively unknown.

36 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

—==_y=
intensity — a vivid
learning
experience will
make a lasting
impression

<0)

Intensity

Intensity or vividness can have a tremendous impact on learning. Intensity simply
means that an experience that is unexpected or that shocks us emotionally will make a
lasting impression on the mind. For example, a stimulus like a loud noise, a flash of
lightning or a near-miss accident will be remembered for some time to come. When a
subject is presented to students in an interesting or vivid manner, it will seldom need
much repetition in order to be remembered. Perhaps one disadvantage of intensity is
that if the emotional shock is too much for the person, extreme fear may block the
learning path.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 37

=a
advanced
organizer
information
presented before
the main content
which serves as
an anchor for the
new ideas which
follow
—=iO __

Basic Principles of Efficient Learning

Principle One

Memory is improved if one establishes a set prior to beginning a task involving
memorization. What does that mean? Our set refers to a mental readiness. It tells us to
be aware of specific aspects of the material. If you are told in advance to “look for
something”, your mind is receptive to the appearance of this information.

Principle Two &

Memory is facilitated by the conscious intent to learn. If you

decide you are determined to concentrate and not be distracted,

you have a better chance of making this happen. For example,

try to focus on that principle the next time you don’t have a

pencil or paper handy and you have to remember a phone

number that is being dictated over the phone. It’s amazing what

you can remember when you tell yourself, “I must remember

this information.” Yi

Principle Three

The accuracy of our memory is governed by the nature of the stimulus. Organized
material is more easily handled by the memory system than is disorganized information.
Advanced organizers may be used to assist the learner. They are brief packages of
information which are presented before the main content. They serve as an anchor of
information for new ideas. The lesson titles you have for each section of this course are
examples of advanced organizers.

Principle Four

Generally distributed practice is more effective for learning than is massed practice.
Periodic reviews of the material reinforce memory. Soon after the initial exposure to the
data, a review should be given. In most cases, frequent review periods of shorter
duration are more fruitful than one long review.

Principle Five

Self-recitation increases the retention of information. Recitation demands the learner’s
full attention. It makes the learner an active participant in the learning process and in the
selection of what will be remembered. Another useful device related to recitation is
using the question technique to prepare the mind for incoming data. For example, the
learner is asked, “What do you hope to learn in the ‘Safe Lab Procedures’ section of the
course?” Then the learner begins to focus more directly on the information that lies
ahead.

38 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=
NLP — the study
of the structure of
learning
experiences which
indicate how new
ideas are
absorbed and
stored using the
senses

ae

Principle Six

Emotions are an important agent in what is remembered or forgotten. Generally
learning is more effective in a pleasant, relaxed atmosphere. However, sometimes a bit
of tension can cause the person to be “on their toes” and ready to learn.

The Power of Personal Learning Styles

How do people acquire information and learn about their world? People use their
senses to gain information about what is taking place around them. Individuals store the
information they acquire in certain kinds of memory tapes as they are learning about
their world. Individuals receive and process data about the world in different ways. You
may have an entirely different learning style than your best friend or your family
members.

Neurolinguistic programming or LP is the
study of the structure of learning experiences.
What individuals sense externally is translated
into internal memory systems. The way
information is absorbed and stored will have
great significance in the way that information
is recalled and used by the individual.

Of the five senses we have, only three are
widely used by individuals as major input
channels for collecting data about our
surroundings. These sensory channels are
visual, auditory and kinesthetic/tactual. Visual
and auditory are self-explanatory. Kinesthetic
refers to whole body experiences involving
feelings, emotions and motion itself. Tactual,
which is the other part of that channel, means learning by touching.

Everyone uses all channels to some degree but each individual has a preferred channel.
Therefore a person’s learning style will differ. The most highly valued channel is the
one that the person typically uses to bring information into the conscious. It is the one
that is used to represent the world and the individual’s experiences. What is your
preferred channel? Probably by the end of this section you will have a very clear
picture of your learning style. It is easy to get in tune with your own preference once
you understand the basic data. Then you will have a feel for the learning style which is
most comfortable for you.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 39

The Visual Learner

Visual learners acquire data about their world through sight. They think in pictures and
in detail. People who are primarily visual will literally “see” pictures in their heads. For
those people who rely on their visual system, it may be as though

they run movies in their heads when remembering or
storing information. Visual learners are usually good
spellers because they “see” the words and get strong
clues from the visual configurations of the words. The
visual learner may stop when reading from time to time
to stare into space and imagine a scene. They have
vivid imaginations. Visual learners easily remember
faces. They are distracted by visual disorder or
movement.

The Kinesthetic/Tactual Learner

Movement makes children active, motivated learners. For those people who are
primarily kinesthetic/tactual learners, body sensations may be associated with the recall
of an experience. The K/T learners use physical contact for learning and employ
techniques involving the manipulation of objects to fix details in their

minds for future recall. These individuals learn best by doing.
They require direct involvement in what they learn,
referred to as the “hands on” experience. When K/T
learners have trouble spelling a word, they prefer to write
it down to check back if it “feels” right to them. They
may find that walking or pacing while reading enhances
their concentration. The K/T learner gestures a lot while
speaking. They select solutions to problems that involve a great deal of
activity.

The Auditory Learner

If individuals are auditory, they prefer to take in information through
sound. They may actually hear original tones or dialogue in their
heads when remembering. For many auditory people, accessing
information may be like hearing the replaying of a tape recorder. They
enjoy listening, but they like talking even more!

They may often move their lips while reading. Auditory learners
respond well to lectures and discussion groups. Because they are
sensitive to sounds, they are easily distracted. Many students with
learning problems seem to be auditory learners.

40 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

To have a better understanding of the three learning modes, try this experiment. Sit
back, take a deep breath and relax in your seat. Close your eyes. Create a visual picture
of a clown with multi-coloured hair and a bright plaid costume or a bouquet of deep red
roses. Now, with your eyes closed, create a kinesthetic representation of a breeze
blowing on your face or the feeling of softness as you pet a rabbit. Finally, with your
eyes closed, create an auditory representation of a telephone ringing or your favourite
song being played.

People experience the previous sensations with varying degrees of vividness. The system
that was easiest for you to relate to is the one you typically use to represent the world and
bring information into consciousness.

Individuals have a primary communication channel which they rely upon during times of
stress or when problem solving. Besides having a dominant or favoured learning style, the
learner also has a secondary choice. People have widely different preferences. For
example, some may have two sensory channels that are almost equally comfortable for
them. Others may have one very dominant channel and they may seldom use the remaining
channels.

How can one’s learning style be determined? Learning preferences can be detected by:

* asking which type of learning tasks are preferred or using an inventory

¢ listening to the predicates which are verbs or key words that appear in the
learner’s speech

* observing the eye movements of the learner

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes Al

Inventories and Checklists

Ask some general questions: How do you make decisions? How are you motivated to
perform a task? How do you tackle a tough problem? What do you do when you want to
be creative?

A cchecklist of choices may be provided.

When I have to learn something, I prefer to learn by:

listening to a lecture

seeing a film

doing an actual demonstration of the skill
talking about the concepts in a discussion group
reading a book about it

playing a part ora role

listening to taped instructions

following diagrams outlining the concepts
doing a step by step replay of the skill

debating the major issues

Which activities are most enjoyable for you?

Predicates

Predicates are words a person chooses to describe their life experiences. Predicates
indicate complex internal thought processes that are occurring. Read the following questions
and pay particular attention to the italicized words. Ask yourself: Is this person a visual
learner, an auditory learner or a kinesthetic/tactual learner?

¢ Is this information in tune with what you learned in the previous lesson?

* Can you picture the obstacles the main character would have to overcome?

¢ Can you grasp the key idea in that paragraph?

* How would you handle a problem like that?

¢ Have you voiced your concerns about the key disadvantage in your reference?

* How will you focus on the main problem in the introduction?

Here is the key: A, V, K/T, K/T, A, V

42 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Eye Movements

Many photographs have been taken of eye scan movements which indicate that eyes
move in a definite pattern as learners access information from their memories. A
question is asked and then the person is observed to find what eye movement patterns
occur. When people think, their eye movements correspond to the ways in which they
remember information or project new ideas. Eye movements are a clue to what mental
operations are happening. When a person looks away after being asked a question, that
is an indication of a switch from external to an internal search for information. They are
“going inside” to find answers.

This is the eye movement pattern for right-handed people and for left-handed people who
write with their hand curved in a hook movement.

When people access a visual memory of something that has actually happened, the eyes
move up and to the left. The eyes move up and to the right when a person is imagining a
visual memory they are making-up.

Visual Imagined Visual Remembered
Right Left

When people access an auditory memory of something that actually happened, their
eyes move across to the left ear. An imagined auditory memory will show the eyes
moving across to the right ear.

Auditory Auditory
Imagined <——_ Remembered
Right Left

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 43

pee
maturation
development of a
human being or
animal through
growth and aging
controlled by
internal
biological factors

ee <<<((0)>

When people access a kinesthetic memory of something, the eyes move downward
toward the body and to the right. If the eyes move downward and to the left, that is an
indication that the person is carrying on an internal dialogue with herself or himself
which is auditory as well.

Kinesthetic Internal Dialogue
Right Left

Human Development: Maturation/Learning

Let us try to examine when and how we learn considering the input from both learning and
maturation. Some present-day psychologists have concluded that a new baby learns from
the very first day of life. There are other theories that learning begins in the womb before
birth. These views contradict an earlier belief that an infant is an unresponsive organism
which can only breathe and eat.

Two major factors modify human behaviour. One is learning; the other is maturation.
Maturation is the development of the individual through growth processes. It is controlled by
internal biological factors. Maturation means the ordinary development of growth and
aging. It occurs naturally without any conscious effort on the part of the individual.
Maturation provides the potential or the basic ability to do something which then makes
way for learning to occur.

44 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

An example of maturation from the animal
world is birds acquiring the ability to fly, and
fish acquiring the ability to swim. Human
beings are more complex. A child’s learning
to walk may be attributed to maturation
because the child learns to walk when
reaching a particular stage in development.
Not every child begins to walk at the same
age. Let’s examine a few examples of
physical skills the young child acquires to
see how maturation and learning work hand
in hand.

For example, a child learns to colour
pictures, keeping inside the lines. Maturation
is helpful from the point of view of
developing eye-hand coordination to handle
the task. Learning is helpful because the
child watches others colour and copies their
behaviour.

Another example: the child acquires the
ability to ride a bicycle. Maturation provides
strength, balance, and coordination so this
task can be done. Learning is helpful
because the child has watched others ride a
bike and may try a few practice sessions to
polish skills for bicycle-riding.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 45

==
concept
formation —
building a system
of ideas about
concrete objects
or abstract ideas

ee <<((0))>

The Basic Theories of Piaget

Jean Piaget was a famous Swiss psychologist. He
gained worldwide recognition for his studies of the
thought processes of children. Piaget outlined four
principle stages of concept formation. A concept
refers to the meaning an individual gives to various
objects or abstract ideas. Concept formation refers to
the way we build these ideas in our mind. For
example, you can picture concept formation as being
like the process a child goes through when assembling
interlocking blocks to make various shapes and
structures.

The following important principles were described by Piaget when talking about
concept formation:

* each stage must occur in proper sequence

¢ achild cannot attempt a more difficult skill until mastering the skills at a lower
level

* each stage is cumulative; earlier skills are retained and lay the foundation for
reaching the next higher level

¢ the child acquires skills gradually and in a systematic order

Trying to hurry a child into understanding a more
difficult concept will not bring positive results. In
fact, it may lead to a lot of frustration. For
example, trying to push young children into
understanding a new concept before they are ready
is like trying to get a group of eight month old
babies to start walking.

Piaget talked about the human mind oscillating
between a state of equilibrium and disequilibrium.
Basically we are content until ideas about our
environment no longer fit. Then we go to work
searching for answers, absorbing new information
and reorganizing our ideas. Thus throughout our
lifetime, our concepts change. The concept one
person may construct in response to an experience
may differ from the concept another person
constructs from an identical experience.

46 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

—
object constancy
— objects continue
to exist even when
they are not
visible

— Oe

Let’s return to a closer examination of Piaget’s four principle stages of concept
formation. Keep in mind that the ages suggested for each stage are approximate.

Stage One - Sensorimotor

Approximate Age Behaviour

Birth to 1 month Sucking reflex

Repetition of certain acts e.g., opening and closing the

‘Tomer te @ manent hands or kicking the legs

6 months to 11 months Coordination of movements

11 months to 18 months Solutions to problems are sought

During the sensorimotor stage, babies learn through physical contact with their surroundings
by using their senses. They acquire a basic idea of cause and effect. For example, if they
push the ball, it will roll across the room.

Object constancy or object permanency is one of the most important concepts the child
learns during this period. Object constancy is the idea that objects continue to exist even
when they are not visible. For example, if a young child is playing with a dangerous toy, you
can take the toy away, put it up in the cupboard and tell the child, “Tt’s all gone”. A very
young child will accept this explanation as being true. As toddlers get a little older, they
realize that cannot happen. An object can’t just disappear because it’s out of sight; that’s
object constancy.

Stage Two - Preoperational

Approximate Age Behaviour

18 months to 4 years Self-centredness is replaced by more emphasis on social
interaction

4 years to 7 years Centration and Decentration - focuses on the main features
of an object, but also accounts for other important details

For example, using centration and decentration, the child would
notice the ball on the left has a triangle shape with a smaller ball

inside it. The ball on the right has a zigzag line through it.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes AT

The whole process of conceptualization is greatly aided and accelerated when the
young child seriously begins to learn the language at 18 months. During Stage Two, the
child also learns to draw which means the child is becoming familiar with abstract
symbols. “What’s that?” is acommon question the child asks while busily labelling all
the objects in sight. At this point the child can understand the concept of height and
length but not mass or volume. For example, the child will correctly answer the
question, “Who is taller - you or your father?” But the child may be uncertain about
which cake is bigger—one that is 23 cm x 23 cm or one that is 23 cm x 33 cm. Another
example: If 4 toy soldiers are grouped together and 4 toy soldiers are spaced a distance
apart, the child might be inclined to say there are fewer toy soldiers in the first group.
The child uses make-believe as a tool for understanding and making sense of the adult
world.

Which person
is the shortest?

Stage Three - Concrete Operational

Approximate Age Behaviour

7 years to 11 years Emphasizes what is real

Problem solving abilities improve during this stage. Children begin to think logically, organize
their knowledge, and classify objects. They can accept the challenge of more
complicated thought problems. Children can now understand that volume remains
constant when moving liquid from one container to another. For example, one begins
with equal amounts of a liquid in identical containers. Then the liquid in one container
is poured into a differently shaped container. The child can now understand that the
volumes in the two containers are still equal.

48 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

a —
abstract concepts
ideas about
objects,
relationships, and
structures

ee <<<((0)))

The child also understands the conservation of mass and weight. For example, a cake is cut
into eight pieces. The mass and weight of the whole cake are identical to the combined mass
and weight of the eight pieces. A younger child who has not yet reached the concrete
operational stage is inclined to say that the eight pieces are more because there are more of
them.

Stage Four - Formal Operational

Approximate Age Behaviour

11 years to 15 years Thought is given to what is possible

Young people are now comfortable in dealing with abstract concepts. Abstract
concepts are ideas about objects that are viewed separately or apart from the physical
object. A concrete concept is a doghouse; an abstract concept is religious freedom.
Existing concepts become more complex and refined. Many new concepts are
developed. The powers of reasoning increase. Young people are now developing adult
logic which is marked by the ability to reason things out beginning with a hypothesis.
They begin to think about the future in a realistic manner.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 49

==
reinforcement —a
process that
strengthens the
possibility of a
response occur-
ring once again

ee <<<((0)>

—= ==
positive
reinforcement — a
pleasant or
favourable factor
that increases the
likelihood of a
response

negative
reinforcement —
removing a
negative factor
that increases the
likelihood of a
response

(0)

A Mixture of Reinforcement, Reward, and Punishment

So far in this lesson we have talked about the personal side of learning. We discussed
self concept, motivation and attitudes. We have just completed a study of Jean Piaget’s
stages of human development from infancy to adolescence. You remember in Section 1,
Lesson 1 we mentioned that to enable psychology to advance to the category of
experimental science, it was necessary for psychology to become involved with the
scientific testing of data. Well, in preparation for the challenging topics of classical and
operant conditioning, our first step will be to talk about important variables that are used
in such procedures—reinforcement, intermittent and secondary reinforcement, reward,
and punishment.

You remember that a stimulus is an object, event or situation which causes a person or
an animal to behave in a particular way. A stimulus could be a red light, a ringing telephone,
a waving hand, or a touch on the arm. A response is the way a person or an animal
behaves toward the stimulus. Ifa situation occurs and a young child responds to it ina
favourable way, a parent might attempt to strengthen that connection by providing
reinforcement. A reinforcement is a process that increases the chances of a certain
behaviour occurring again. For example, there are a pile of toys in the living room (stimulus),
the child puts them away in the toy cupboard (response). The parent is pleased with the
child’s behaviour and therefore rewards the child with a cookie and praise (reinforcement).

Acookie, a hug, getting extra privileges at home, and an allowance are all examples of
positive reinforcement. Presenting a reinforcement strengthens the response. That’s pretty
clear. But negative reinforcement is also a possibility. A negative reinforcement includes
anything negative that is removed from the environment like loud noises, physical pain,
punishment, or annoyances of any kind. Removing a reinforcement strengthens the
response.

50 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

ay —
complete
reinforcement —
when a correct
response is made,
reinforcement is
given each and
every time

partial
reinforcement
(intermittent)
when a correct
response is made,
sometimes
reinforcement is
given and
sometimes it is
withheld

secondary
reinforcement —a
reward that is
associated with
something that
fulfills the actual
need e.g. money

ee

Since negative reinforcement is a little more difficult to visualize, let’s think of some
illustrations. For example, a little girl knows that if she picks up all of her toys she
won‘t get a scolding. Removing the threat of a scolding encourages her to behave ina
favourable way. Another example: you fell and broke your arm while skating. The pain
is intense. When you go to the doctor for treatment, you anticipate even more pain
while your arm is being properly set in a cast. However, you decide to go to the doctor
to repair the damage of the broken arm knowing that it will eventually feel better. Both
positive and negative reinforcement are rewards.

Positive reinforcement ............sseeseeeseeeeeeeeeee Presenting strengthens response
Negative reinforcement..............sseeeeeeeee FEMOvIng Strengthens response

Does the amount of time between a correct response and the reinforcement of that
response have a significant effect in learning the response? The shorter the time span
between a correct response and the reward, the more likely the animal or person will
learn that response.

Complete reinforcement means that when an
animal or person makes a correct response, a reward
or reinforcement is given each and every time it
occurs. Complete reinforcement is important in the
first stages of learning when habits are becoming
established. Partial or intermittent reinforcement
means that when an animal or person makes a
correct response, sometimes a reward is given, and
sometimes it is withheld. Partial reinforcement can
follow a definite pattern, or sometimes it is random
and unpredictable. For example, every third time
your dog does a trick, you give him a dog biscuit.
Or, occasionally you give your dog a biscuit for
doing a trick if you happen to be in the right mood
that day.

Some experimental evidence suggests that both people and animals perform faster and
for longer periods of time when given intermittent reinforcement rather than complete
reinforcement. If a person is always rewarded, the person may begin to take the reward
for granted. Intermittent rewards often increase the individual’s motivation to try harder
and therefore receive more frequent rewards in the future.

A secondary reinforcement is a reward that has been associated with something that
satisfies the actual need. It becomes the reward in a round-about way. The secondary
reinforcement is not a direct reward but is a stepping-stone to help you get what you
want. Money is a very common example of a secondary reinforcement. Money gives us
the opportunity to acquire the things we need and want to satisfy our desires. We work

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 51

for money which in turn satisfies our needs. Here is another example: when you were
in elementary school your teacher gave you stars on your assignments for good work.
When you received a certain number of stars, you would get a treat of some kind. The
stars you received would be secondary reinforcement.

One of the basic learning principles is that it is more effective to reinforce desired behaviour
with reward than to punish undesired behaviour. A child is rewarded with love for good
behaviour; a child is spanked for bad behaviour. A positive reinforcement does more to
motivate good behaviour in the future than the fear of punishment does to make the person
avoid negative behaviour. Therefore, reward is usually a more significant influence in shaping
or changing one’s behaviour.

Mild punishment might be useful in some circumstances if it cautions people to be more
careful about behaviour that could be potentially dangerous. However, the fear and anxiety
generated by punishment usually hampers the learning process. Punishment stops
undesirable behaviour, but the behaviour may reappear if the punishment ceases.
Punishment is not a permanent solution for improving behaviour.

Punishment tells the individual what not to do; it does not indicate what the person should
do. Punishment merely says “no”. For example, suppose you are learning a new skill that
you have never seen before. You are handed a strange piece of equipment. You move your
hand one way, and you are punished. You try another movement and are punished again.
You try a third way and receive more punishment. Have you learned the skill? No! But you
have probably picked up a great sense of fear. Punishment may make a person or animal so
fearful that they make even more mistakes than usual. Punishment may lead to behaviour
that is less predictable than behaviour that comes from rewarding desirable responses.
Anxiety interferes with learning. Ifa family member is sick, you may be worried about them
and can’t concentrate.

52 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=e
conditioning
learning a
particular
response when a
stimulus is
presented

classical
conditioning —
pairing an
unconditioned
stimulus with a
new stimulus until
this conditioned
stimulus elicits
the given
response

unconditioned
stimulus (UCS) —
a stimulus that
automatically
elicits a response
with no learning
involved

unconditioned
response (UCR) —
a response that
automatically
occurs with no
learning involved

ee <«<((0))>

Classical Conditioning

In 1901, Russian psychologist Ivan Pavlov
conducted a very interesting experiment with dogs.
He had noticed that just when he was about to feed
his dogs, they would drool saliva from their
mouths. This response was quite natural because
they needed these juices to soften their food and
begin digestion. But then Pavlov began the practice
of ringing a bell at the same time or just before he
gave them food. After a good many feedings
following the bell-ringing routine, he decided to
just ring the bell without immediately giving them
their food. He noticed that the dogs salivated as
they had done before. In other words, whereas
formerly they had made the response of salivation
to the appearance of food, they now salivated when
the stimulus was merely the sound of the bell.

Conditioning refers to the learning of a particular response when a stimulus is
presented. For example, when the telephone rings (stimulus), you pick it up (response).
You are conditioned to answer the phone when it rings. Classical conditioning refers
to a learning situation in which a certain stimulus (situation or event) brings forth a
response that it did not previously produce. The dogs in Pavlov’s experiment were
subjected to classical conditioning. Let’s break down the elements of the situation to
understand it better.

In Pavlov’s experiment, the meat is the unconditioned stimulus (UCS) because meat is the
normal, natural product that would cause saliva to flow in dogs. The flow of saliva is known
as the unconditioned response (UCR) because that response occurs naturally with no
learning necessary.

ucs UCR
—_______. >
(meat) Unlearned (flow of saliva)

When Pavlov rang a bell and then offered the dogs food, he was linking a conditioned
stimulus (CS) to a conditioned response (CR). In other words, the dogs learned to
associate a bell with food which is an unnatural response that must be learned. Bells do
not automatically bring the idea of food to mind unless that association has been
learned.

cs CR
(bell sound) Learned (saliva flows when bell is heard)

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 53

(0 aa
counter
conditioning —
replacing a
conditioned
response to a
particular
stimulus with a
different response

extinction
elimination of
conditioned
response by
continually
withholding
reinforcement

Spontaneous
recovery — the
reappearance of
conditioned
response after a
rest period
following
extinction

tO

Some pet owners have noticed that dogs or cats hear the sound of an electric can
opener and associate that sound with feeding time because the pet is often given a can
of food after that sound is heard.

Let’s see how that behaviour would be presented.

ucs UCR
(an open can «—_____. Unlearned —__———_> (cat meows because
of food) they smell food)
cs CR
(sound of electric «<—— Learned ——» (meowing because can opener
can opener) sound now means "food")

In some cases counter-conditioning may be necessary
when we want an individual to learn a new behaviour.
Counter-conditioning means replacing one conditioned
response to a particular stimulus with a different
response. It is often used to get rid of undesirable
behaviour. Counterconditioning breaks the original
connection and links another response to the stimulus.
For example, many people believe that smoking
cigarettes is enjoyable, sophisticated, and cool. Counter-
conditioning could be attempted by having someone
who is having severe respiratory ailments speak about
the suffering cigarette smoking has brought them.

Extinction refers to the elimination of a conditioned response because the conditioned
stimulus has been presented many times without the usual reinforcement. For example,
an electric can opener is turned on fifty times and your pet dog never receives food
once after hearing that sound. The dog will eventually believe that the can opener
sound is no longer linked to food. Extinction has occurred for that habit.

Itis very difficult to eliminate well learned behaviours. Spontaneous recovery is the
reappearance of a conditioned response after a rest period following extinction. During the
period of extinction, no reinforcement has been given at all. Those conditions make it
amazing that a spontaneous recovery of the response suddenly takes place out of the blue.
For example, take the previous situation with the pet and the electric can opener Your dog
has heard the can opener fifty times without food, and he no longer reacts to the can opener
as if he expects food. One day the can opener is used and he suddenly whines for food
even though the can opener has been used many times without providing food for him. His
whining indicates spontaneous recovery because the link in his mind between food and the
electric can opener has been revived. Another example: a young woman witnessed a bad
traffic accident. She was so upset by what she saw, that when the police officer asked her
address, she automatically started giving the address from a previous residence where she
had lived 8 years ago.

54 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
generalization —
similar
experiences are
grouped together
and the
individual
responds to them
all in the same
way

operant
conditioning —
strengthening a
response by
immediately
presenting
reinforcement
following the
response

<0)

Generalization occurs when similar experiences are presented to the individual. A
conditioned response to certain stimuli is established. Other stimuli which is similar will
also bring about that response. That is generalization. For example, if the dog has been
conditioned to whine when he hears the electric can opener he might also whine when
he hears the blender or electric mixer if he perceives these sounds are similar to that of
the can opener. Another example: a young child is shown how to pet a cat. When the
child sees other animals like dogs, bunnies, and hamsters, she generalizes that she
should pet these animals in the same way.

Operant Conditioning

Operant conditioning is the strengthening of a certain
response by immediately presenting reinforcement if

the response occurs. The word operant is used

because the person’s response in some way operates

on the environment. For example, students study their
psychology notes so that they can do the assignments

and pass the exam. Another example: a dog obeys the
command to “sit” so it receives a treat. Another example: a

child is assigned household chores which are completed
enabling the child to receive an allowance.

To avoid confusion between operant and classical conditioning, let’s look at the process
involved in each one in its simplest form.

The Order of Events for Classical Conditioning

stimulus ——————>_ reinforcement ———————»_ response

The Order of Events for Operant Conditioning

stimulus ———————> response ———————> _ reinforcement

In summary, the order of events is different between classical and operant conditioning.
Here are two other differences:

* in operant conditioning, the subject takes a more active role in the situation

* in operant conditioning, the unconditioned stimulus is not known; it usually
involves a motivation we can’t directly observe. For example, we don’t know
exactly what motivates a student to study, a dog to sit, or a child to do the
household chores. We assume they are working for certain goals, but we are not
sure how the motivation works. In classical conditioning, the unconditioned
stimulus is specifically known. A dish of food is shown to a hungry dog. When it
is filled, the dog will come and eat it.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 55

ge
mind mapping
illustrating a
concept with
branches of ideas
related to it

<0)

Mind Mapping Skills

\Viind mapping is an extremely useful skill to develop when there is a lot of
information to understand, absorb, and remember for future reference. Mind mapping is
also called concept mapping or webbing. The beauty of mind mapping is that is it a
personal, simple, and clear way to remember large volumes of material.

Mind mapping is like a shorthand diagram of a concept.
¢ Usea blank sheet of paper for your ideas.

¢ Print the concept you are focusing on in the centre of the page. Enclose it in a
circle. You may want to enhance it by drawing a symbol in the circle with the
printed name.

¢ Think of major components associated with the key concept. For each main
component, draw a line or a “branch” radiating out from the centre circle. Label each
branch in large print. The labels you choose are like stepping stones to the
complex information associated with each main branch. Use a different colour to
trace each branch.

¢ Think about secondary information associated with each of the main branches.
Each new idea gets a branch line and a label of its own. Where ever a symbol
comes to mind, sketch it beside the name.

key concept

concept

Colour reinforces the key ideas in our minds. This may seem rather silly like an elementary
exercise, but remember, you are simplifying material so the brain can easily store it and
retrieve it. The branching network of ideas clearly shows the relationships between the key
concept, the main components, and the secondary ideas. The simple labels we choose for
each key idea helps the connections as well. Simple symbol sketches are important memory
anchors which help build the memory bridges.

56 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Let’s build a very simple mind map around a concept that is easily understood and
practised by everyone—What I Do In the Morning. You appear in the centre. Do you
want to draw yourself in old-fashioned pyjamas and nightcap?

Some of the main branch lines will include: tidying bedroom, interacting with family
members, eating, personal hygiene, dressing, pre-work chores, and mental readiness for

work.

Look at the concept map drawn below to see how each branch detail is completed and to
check some of the symbols that are used.

Remember, a mind map must be completed in an array of colours.

Colour each branch along with its secondary branches a specific colour. The next branch
with its network of secondary branches is done in a different colour. Notice how colour
provides a stronger anchor for memory.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 57

===
SQ3R — survey,
question, read,
recite, review

ee

A Road Map To Improve Your Reading

Having a good foundation in reading skills is important for academic success. Hints to
improve reading skills can be summarized in the SQ31 technique as follows:

SURVEY

Begin by skimming a chapter. Read the main headings. Notice how the information
has been organized. Look at the pictures. Read the diagrams, charts, graphs, and
bold print words to get the main idea of the chapter.

QUESTION

If the author has a set of questions at the end of the chapter, read them and give them
some thought. Questions of your own which you expect to be answered in the
chapter should come to mind. This will give you a purpose for reading.

READ

Read the chapter thoroughly now.

RECITE

When you have finished reading, respond to your original questions in your own
words. Summarize what you have read.

REVIEW

Keep brief notes about the major
points in the chapter. Refer to them
from time to time to refresh you
memory.

58 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Efficiency Begins With Your Own Study Habits

Let’s get very practical in this section and discuss methods you can utilize to improve
your day-to-day study efficiency. As a beginning, you might be wise to take a very
close personal inventory of your study habits. Consider these questions:

¢ What is the best time of day for you to study?
¢ How long is your average, uninterrupted study session?

* Do you attempt to engage in other activities while studying
like listening to the radio or snacking?

* Generally, how often are you interrupted by other people
while studying?

* How often do you study with other students? What is
your reason for doing so?

¢ What is the best place for you to study—-sitting at a desk or reclining on the floor
or on the bed?

¢ What subjects require the most time for study?

¢ What subjects are most difficult to study? Should you try to do the tough subjects
all at once or try to intersperse them with easy subjects?

Efficiency in learning means more free time for you. If you have developed an individual
style of studying that is working for you and is suited to your own tastes, then good for you!
It is not necessary to follow someone else’s formula unless you are working without
any guidelines and are having problems.

Top Students Reveal These Secrets To Success

Here are some tips from exceptional students:

* Havea goal in mind. Don’t underestimate your own
abilities if your goal is important.

‘S ai

¢ Beself-motivated. The greatest thrill is meeting your own
expectations.

* Don’t be overly concerned about your peers.

¢ Be familiar with time and stress management that suits you. Plan your priorities.
Stick with what you can handle and be realistic about what you can accomplish.

* Don’t procrastinate. Do homework as soon as it has been assigned so you don’t
get back-logged.

* Be flexible. Save some time to relax and have fun as a balance to your work load.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 59

60

Summary

Hopefully this lesson has not been too much of a challenge with an overload of abstract
ideas. Learning theory is not an easy topic to tackle.

To summarize:

* Learning involves mastering information from many sources to increase
competence.

« Learning can be perceptual motor (acquiring a physical skill), affective
(involving emotions) or cognitive (involving problem solving).

* Self-concept means how we view ourselves.

* Students with a positive self-concept have confidence in their learning
ability; a negative self-concept leads to feelings of inferiority.

* Being motivated and having a positive attitude toward the learning situation
will make people more effective learners.

* Maturation refers to development through growth and aging; maturation and
learning work together to help people acquire skills.

¢ The learning curve shows a lot of variation because people master material in
different ways.

* Plateaus occur in learning when there is a standstill in learning progress.

¢ Transfer means that learning in one situation can be applied to another
situation.

* Transfer is positive if it improves the learning situation; it is negative if earlier
learning interferes with present learning.

* Overlearning means to learn information until you know it thoroughly and
have complete mastery of it.

* Massed practice means that learning occurs during the space of one session.

* Distributed practice means that learning sessions are separated by rest
periods.

¢ Serial learning refers to learning a series of responses in a definite sequence.
The first item is easiest remembered (primacy effect) and so is the last item on
the list (recency effect).

* Mnemonic devices are formulas or jingles that are devised to help one
remember.

* Sometimes we are not aware that we have learned something until after the
fact; that is latent learning.

* Learning by insight occurs when a person suddenly puts together the right
pieces of the problem.

Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Trial and error learning involves attempting to solve a problem by
randomly testing solutions.

Natural association involves grouping together similar kinds of objects or
concepts.

An intense emotional experience will have a lasting impact on our memories.
Neurolinguistic programming gives us information about our own personal
learning style.

Visual learners primarily gather data about their surroundings through sight
and store memory of these events in pictures.

Kinesthetic/tactual learners use body movement, sensations, and emotions to
collect and store data about their lives.

Auditory learners prefer to take in information through sound and may
actually replay dialogue or sounds in their heads to remember.
Inventories, predicates, and eye movements reveal a learner’s preferred
style.

Jean Piaget outlined four principle stages of concept formation.

Stage One—Sensorimotor (birth to 18 months), acquires information
through the senses, learns object constancy.

Stage Two—Preoperational (18 months to 7 years), learns more
sophisticated concepts through language, notices details, understands
height and length.

Stage Three—Concrete Operational (7 to 11 years), classifies objects plus
understands that volume, mass and weight remain constant, that is, objects
do not automatically expand or decrease in size.

Stage Four—Formal Operational (11 to 15 years), abstract concepts
become more complex and refined.

Presenting a positive reinforcement strengthens the possibility of a response;
removing negative reinforcement also strengthens the possibility of a
response.

Partial or intermittent reinforcement means that reinforcement is not
provided for every correct response.

Secondary reinforcement is an indirect reward.

Punishment is less effective than reward in encouraging the learning
process.

Classical conditioning involves stimulus—reinforcement—reward.

Operant conditioning involves stimulus—reward—reinforcement.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes

61
