¢ Counter-conditioning means reprogramming a stimulus to a different
response.

¢ Extinction occurs when a conditioned response has been eliminated.

¢ Spontaneous recovery means the reappearance of a response after a rest-
time.

¢ When similar experiences are grouped together, the individual is
generalizing.
¢ Mind mapping means presenting the details of a concept in diagram format.

¢ SQ3R means survey, question, read, recite, and review material.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 2 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

62 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Lesson 2: Thinking and Memory

Overview

Thought and language are two tools that are used every minute of the waking day. Our
very advanced form of thinking sets us apart from all other kinds of animals. Language
too is a very special mode of human communication for expressing emotions, abstract
thoughts, and useful day-to-day information for living. Take just one aspect of our life-
leisure-and consider what immense changes would take place without language. The
restrictions would be overwhelming! With the multitude of people that populate the
earth, could we survive without a complex system of thought and language even if we
were to regress to the very simplest lifestyle?

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 63

Lesson 2 will focus on topics:

¢ First Memories

¢ The Brain: Thinking Power

¢ Left Brain/Right Brain

* Tools for Thinking: Language and Symbols
¢ Thinking Basics

¢ Thinking Processes: Remembering

¢ Thinking Processes: Reasoning

¢ Thinking Processes: Critical Thinking

¢ Thinking Problems: Forgetting

* Communication Problems: Dyslexia

* Concentration Problems: Attention Deficiency Disorder
¢ Interrelating Problems: Autism

* The Element of Colour

Before we begin this lesson think about some of the useful learning techniques that were
presented. One of the values of learning is to apply knowledge to bring about improvements
and make a difference. It is a complete waste of time to learn something beneficial and let it
sit on the shelf collecting dust.

So take a few minutes. You are expected to exercise your brain before you begin because
this lesson is mentally challenging.

* Flip through the pages, rereading the titles.

¢ Note any illustrations.

* Find some of the bold print words.

¢ Think about the topic

* Read the assignments that you are expected to complete.

¢ Ifyou have a few minutes, check the important words in the glossary

Remember to use these techniques with all of your future lessons to build your learning
power skills.

64 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

===
neuron — a single
nerve cell; in
order to function,
the neuron needs
to be part of a
system of nerves

ee <<((0)

Special First Memories and Personal Memories

You are in a crib, hoping to be fed and changed. Your mobile swings above your crib which

soothes your feelings and occupies your mind for a while. After what seems like a long time,

you start crying loudly and your mother appears at the bedroom door to look after you. She
is wearing a white cotton dress with a wide wing collar. You can even remember the fragrant
perfume she is wearing. With great conviction you state: “This was my very first memory.” Is
that possible? Is that true?

Some people solemnly swear they can clearly remember events from their earliest
babyhood. Other people have the odd memory of episodes in their preschool days
especially if the event was full of emotion—moving to a new house, death of a pet, an injury,
or the birth of a new sibling. Many people can recall the drama of their first day of school.
Other people stare blankly for a while and then say, “Well, I don’t remember anything until I
was about 9 or 10 years old.”

The early memories we salvage have an interesting background. First, language is a
key factor. Getting the memories into an oral language and being able to talk to
someone about them is important for remembering. What about people who say that
through hypnosis they are able to remember events from their early infancy? These are
not accurate pictures. An infant does not possess a developed memory. Some people
say they were able to understand a conversation which is beyond the capacity of a
young child. In general, we usually do not store an event in our memory when we are
at the pre-verbal stage before we have developed a basic language structure.

Neurons play a central part in memory. Neurons connect to other neurons and form cell
assemblies. Memories derive from the interactions of cell assemblies. Young children cannot
recall memories of their early childhood because the cell assemblies have not yet developed.
It is interesting to note that no two cell assemblies are organized in the same way, therefore
each person’s cell assemblies are unique in that aspect.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 65

—
autobiographical
memory — the

personal
memories you
have of your life

Can you portray an accurate description of what went on as an adult looking back at
childhood memories? In general, you can’t. If you find a diary from your earlier years, you
may be quite astonished at the discrepancies between your view of the event as a young
person and what you have stored in your memory as an adult. Would you want a perfect
memory? Would you want every event that happened to you to be stored accurately and
recalled with perfect detail and emotion? What about the pain of an event? There is a lot of
benefit to the fact we do not have perfect memories or that memories change or diminish
over time.

Children who have a lot of confidence in themselves have poorer memories. They
don’t remember their failures. A lot of our lives are so boring and routine that they
never get into our memories in the first place. For example, you get up, wash, dress, eat
breakfast and leave for school or for work. None of those everyday routines are
memorable unless something unusual happens.

What can we do to keep our memories alive and
fresh? Some memories just endure because we enjoy
them, we talk about them. Family photo albums are
important records. Diaries are very common.
Sometimes people get a tape recorder and record
their memories in that way. With the popularity of
video cameras, that is certainly a precise way to
capture not only the memory, but also the emotion of
an event. Videos are most commonly used to record
the positive moments in our lives. Will we get an
“unbalanced” view of the past if we rely too heavily
ona replay of video memories of only pleasant
events?

What is memory for? The point of it is to take experiences from our past in a shape that we
can use them in the present and the future. Our memory writes things in narrative form,
telling a story about the turning points of our life. Memories give us an impression of who we
are and how we came to be that way. In the process of refining our memories, we will drop
some things and edit others. Autobiographical memory has the ability to search our lives
for enduring themes and then to find some striking event in the past that symbolizes that
theme.

Is memory about the past or about the present? Probably the present. An event happens
and is recalled, but the emotional flavour of what happened comes from the present.
Memory is alive. Memories change. Memories are our allies that help us cope. They
nourish us.

66 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

The Brain

The brain is an incredibly complex
physiological organ. The brain works every
moment of our lives performing many
functions simultaneously—processing our
thoughts, emotions, and imagination. The
brain also monitors critical functions to
maintain the overall health of the body. Our
general social and cultural knowledge is
processed by the brain so that we may
interact in a productive way with other
members of our society. It would seem the
brain is put together in a rigid, defined way,
but the brain’s connections are modified by
the experiences we have had. Learning
actually changes the structure of the brain.
Therefore, the more we learn, the more
unique we become. One might say that the
actual “wiring” of the brain is affected by
school and life experiences.

Some people compare the brain to both an artist and a scientist. The reason for the
comparison is that the brain understands and deciphers patterns as they occur (the scientist);
but the brain goes one step beyond that and creates unique patterns of its own (the artist).
The brain searches for meaning. It has two main functions: to register familiar stimuli and to
simultaneously search for novel stimuli.

Many aspects of the brain remain a mystery, but here are some general principles we have
discovered. The brain resists having meaningless or disorganized patterns imposed on it.
Concentrating too heavily on the storage and recall of unconnected facts is a very inefficient
use of the brain. The brain works best under conditions of relaxed alertness. This means the
most productive conditions favour an atmosphere that is low in threat and high in challenge.
Under perceived threat, we literally lose access to portions of our brain. The brain seems to
be shocked into a state where thinking power is drained away.

Information that is directly presented to the brain is absorbed. But the ability of the brain
=a ss goes much beyond that to absorb information and signals that lie in the realm of peripheral;
synergy — the subtle signals that are not consciously noticed are also detected. This means that the brain
brain collects responds to the entire sensory context. We remember what we experience—not just what
impressions from : : :
sight, hearing, we are told. Synergy means our experiences through sight, hearing, movement, and
symbols and symbols are all synthesized or drawn together by the brain. The result is intuition, insight and
movement creativity. The whole spectrum of information processed directly or indirectly by the brain
——<«2==— _ willinfluence motives and decisions.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 67

ge
hemisphere —a
major section of
the brain-right
and left side

spatial
orientation —
ability to
visualize objects
in relation to
each other

ce <<<((0)))>

Right Brain/Left Brain

Recent studies of thinking have revealed that 85% of our brain is devoted to sensing, feeling
and emotion. Only 15% is devoted to cognitive reasoning. But the school system puts
emphasis on the narrower aspect of cognitive reasoning leaving a large part of our brain’s
potential unchallenged.

The human brain is divided into two main parts or hemispheres, the left and the right.
The brain theory suggests that each hemisphere specializes in different kinds of
conscious awareness. The right hemisphere or right brain (these terms will be used
interchangeably) seems to govern artistic talents, intuitive thought, and spatial orientation.
In other words, the right hemisphere handles most of the creativity. It operates in a random
fashion. The right hemisphere is the centre for thinking which occurs by process of intuitive
judgment. The right brain prefers to tackle a large mass of data as a whole rather than picky
details. It likes to react to the “big picture”. Working through problems by beginning with an
overview (global perspective) of the situation is related to inductive reasoning. (You will
learn about that in the section on Thinking Processes: Reasoning.) Right brain people do not
have a precise sense of time; they are often late. The right hemisphere prefers to have real-
life, concrete examples of what we see, hear, and feel. It creates images from this data. It
interprets our environment. The right hemisphere is comfortable in dealing with nonverbal
responses, movement, athletic behaviours, and synthesizing processes (drawing ideas
together). Visual and emotional awareness comes to us through right brain activity. The right
brain focuses on creativity, colour sensitivity, and shapes and patterns. Right brain qualities
have not been explored enough or valued enough.

The left hemisphere or left brain appears to be mainly responsible for logical thought,
language and analytic processes. That is, the left hemisphere responds to problem
solving and rational assessments. The left hemisphere is labelled the rational side of our
mind. The left hemisphere prefers an orderly, sequential, step-by-step analysis of a
problem similar to deductive reasoning process. (See Thinking Processes: Reasoning.)
Labels, headings, classifications are easily
handled by the left brain. The centre for almost
all language processing occurs in the left
hemisphere which means verbal, linguistic
abilities reside here. The left hemisphere is
comfortable with abstract ideas and symbols.
The left brain is skillful in following precise
directions, working with facts and details. Left
brain people are punctual. Left brain activities
are a major part of the current school system.

68 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

== —
corpus callosum —
the nerve tissue
that connect, both
hemispheres of
the brain

ei

LEFT RIGHT

Global
Inductive Reasoning

Sequential
Deductive Reasoning

Abstract - Symbol Concrete - Image

Written Words Visuals
Spoken Words Sounds
Numerals Feelings

Body Movements

Left/Right Hemispheres of the Brain

The nerve tissues of the corpus callosum join both hemispheres. One should not get
the impression that the activities of the two hemispheres are completely independent
and uncoordinated. On the contrary, the two hemispheres are well integrated for smooth
functioning.

Most of you have preferred brain activities (left or right) but manage to do many of the
tasks related to the other hemisphere. How can the idea of different mental functions for
each hemisphere be tested? People have been given different mental tasks, and while
they are involved in the tasks, the brain waves are monitored. Tiny electrical waves are
emitted by each hemisphere depending on the mental activity taking place. The human
brain is complex and incredible!

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 69

=qqgys= —
arbitrary
random,
changing, varying

ee <«((0))>

== —
symbol —
something that
represents
something else

— Oe

Tools For Thinking: Language and Symbols

Language and thought are of utmost importance for the high quality of life we
experience as human beings. Both language and thought contribute to survival, smooth
functioning of interpersonal relationships, and the all round progress we enjoy.

Language has the power to convey practical information, values, emotions, ideals,
noble thoughts, humour, and entertainment. If you have ever watched or participated in
a game of charades, you will know the frustration of trying to express a thought without
verbal language.

The organization of the language system is very complex. A language system is set up
by using an arbitrary selection of sounds to indicate meaning. Arbitrary refers to
choosing something by random decision. For example, in English b-o-o-k means a
collection of printed words about a topic, or a story. At some point in time, people
agreed to that meaning for b-o-o-k although those letters forming the word “book” have
nothing to do with an actual book. The letters were randomly chosen to represent book.
Through continued usage, a particular meaning of the letters and how they sound
becomes established. For example, when the disease, AIDS, was first diagnosed it had
a longer more cumbersome medical name. The new, shortened version became AIDS,
and after continued usage, a specific meaning to that word has become established and
recognized far and wide.

Rigid rules for the sounds and the words must be obeyed. Both the listener and speaker
must understand and accept the meaning of the terms and definitions if communication
is to be fruitful. If any one of these elements fail, the language system breaks down.

Language employs symbols. A symbol! is something used for, or regarded as
representing something else. It could be an object, a gesture, or a sound. A symbol may
be an emblem, token, sign, flag, pin, badge, logo, or a diagram, just to name a few. An
architect’s sketch of your house and the blueprint plans are both symbols of your house
as it exists in the real world. The word “house” on this page is also a symbol of your
place of residence. Symbols enable us to manipulate ideas in the thinking process.

70 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

»

Various Symbols Money Symbol Flag Symbol

In summary, what are some of the most significant benefits of language?

* Language enhances our recollection of past experiences. This ability facilitates
thinking. It allows us to organize and review information so problems may be
easily solved. For example, you say to yourself, “What did I do the last time I had
a similar problem?”

* More precise and accurate descriptions of objects and events are possible through
language which sharpens our awareness and attention. For example, when you put
names to feelings, they become more focused e.g., nostalgia means thinking of the
past with fond memories.

* Language establishes and builds group unity. The uniqueness of the language a
group chooses sharpens the feelings of belongingness. For example, the drug
group utilized special slang terms to identify the “in” group. Drug related terms
were frequently changed to keep the group isolated from outsiders as well.
Sometimes language can be used in discriminatory ways when it comes to group
unity. How would your group react to someone who joined them and spoke with
a heavy foreign accent?

« Language can be used as a means of control through the use of direct requests,
orders and commands. For example, instructions on an exam, verbal commands
by a superior, or a TV appeal supporting a worthy cause are all effective in
directing our behaviour. Indirect, subtle methods of controlling behaviour through
language are also evident. For example, the whole language of advertising is a
fascinating example of this. A popular celebrity uses Brand X and we consider
buying it the next time we shop.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 71

Thinking Basics
Before we define thinking, let’s look at two important categories of behaviour.

Explicit Behaviour: It is behaviour that is easily observed and measured. Explicit
behaviour is sometimes referred to as overt behaviour. When
you think of the word “overt” think of open or easily seen. For
example, any behaviour involving strenuous muscular activity
like a man lifting a heavy box would be explicit behaviour.
Another example: raising your hand to answer a question.

Implicit Behaviour: Itis behaviour not easily
observable by another
person and is usually only
detected with the aid of
special, sensitive measuring
instruments. It is sometimes
referred to as covert
behaviour. When you see the
word “covert” think of
covered or hidden
behaviour. For example,
one’s face remains
expressionless but the pupils
of the eyes dilate to indicate
mild surprise. It could be
detected by the use of special instruments. Another example
would be a person thinking about how to solve a puzzle; the
observer could not see this individual’s thinking processes.

Implicit Speech: Is the term used to refer to the tiny muscular reactions that are
produced while the individual is engaged in thinking. If you look
closely, you can see the vocal chords moving. The person is
said to be sub-vocalizing while reading; it is in between oral
reading and genuine silent reading. Implicit speech has two vital
roles; itreceives and assimilates external stimuli and it processes
data internally.

72 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

== —
localized — a
precise area that
is connected to a
specific function

ae <<((0)

Youngsters have often been observed talking out loud to themselves as they busily
participate in some activity. Later children will talk silently to themselves. Let’s explore
talking and thinking a little further. In fact, we all admit talking to ourselves—even adults do
it! Every time we listen we can hear our inner voices. This is sometimes mistaken for
thinking but it isn’t. Thought has to flow. We think as we speak or write. Self examination
stops thought in its tracks. In our everyday conversations we might think about what we are
going to talk about, but not about how we will actually say it.

So what is thinking? Thinking is part of everything we do. Thinking is the mental
processes and skills we use to shape our lives. Thinking is not an occasional mental
activity. It goes on all the time without awareness. Thinking organizes reality for us. It
creates alternative realities we might hope to achieve or avoid, that is, it brings images
to us of the way things might be if we proceed in a certain direction.

There are various localized centres in the brain for vision, sensory responses, or certain
muscular reactions, but there doesn’t appear to be a localized thought centre. Localized
means that we can pinpoint a specific area that is responsible for each of those
functions.

Thinking is the most complex activity that people perform. It is more than just
perception or an awareness of the environment. Thinking is an implicit behaviour by
which an individual becomes aware of and manipulates past experiences by means of
symbols. This allows us to review the choices we have at hand and make the best decisions
possible.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 73

Thinking Processes - Remembering

Mystery and wonder at the workings of the human mind have frequently been stated. If
we didn’t have memory, language would disappear and so would our meaningful
communication with others. Without memory there would be no intellectual
functioning. We could not utilize past experiences to improve our current situation. Perhaps
the operation of our memory system can be better understood with the explanation that
memory can be subdivided into three sections:

Sensory Memory: memory pertaining to the senses like the smell of a particular
flower, the taste of chocolate cake, or the touch of silk

Motor-skill Memory: — memory concerning the remembered response of doing
something physical like walking, skating, riding a bike or
turning a somersault

Verbal Memory: memory involving everything a person has thought, read or
heard

Retention means what is retained or
remembered, or holding on to what
has been learned. Our capacity for
retention in sensory and motor-skill
memory is extremely powerful. For
example, upon seeing a landscape
similar to one you have seen earlier;
you may be convinced that you have
really witnessed the scene before
because of such an acute visual
memory. This experience is labelled
“deja vu’ from the French which
means “already seen’. In other
words, we mistakenly believe a
similar experience is a repeated
experience.

A few people have been blessed with photographic memories. That means their visual
memories are so acute and precise that the smallest details are remembered. Someone
with a photographic memory might be able to reproduce word for word recall for
several pages of material as if they had taken a picture in their minds and were reading
the original copy. Some of the great composers have a type of photographic memory
only in the auditory realm. Motor-skill memory is strong too. Once you learn how to
ride a bike, the skill stays with you for life.

TA Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

ee

Short term
memory — the
initial entry of
information to
our awareness

long term memory
information is
thoroughly
learned and
understood so we
may retain it over
an extended
period of time-
maybe evena
lifetime
—=—O

Unfortunately verbal memory is not as easy to master as the other two and must be
approached more diligently. Verbal memory comes in two forms: short term or active
and long term. The terms are self-explanatory. Short term memory initially collects and
examines data, but long term memory is really the key to learning.

All the information we receive first goes into short term memory where it can be recalled
very easily. Since we receive so much information everyday, things can only be stored in
short term memory for a brief period of time. Some of that information is successfully coded
so it can be transferred to long term memory. Some information that goes into long term
memory seems to be forgotten. One explanation is that the information may never have
reached long term memory. Another reason could be that the right cues are never presented
in order to call up the information that has been stored possibly under a variety of headings
in long term memory. So a person’s retrieval skills are weak. Long term memories seem to
decay less than short term, but are more subject to interference and distortion from
competing memories.

The likelihood of information getting into long term
storage is greater the smaller the amount of
material presented, the more novel it is, the more
actively it is rehearsed, and the greater its
significance in helping the individual cope with
environmental demands. For example, most
married couples can clearly remember the moment
they became engaged because it has such
significance for their lives. Non-similar or unique
items are remembered with greater ease than
similar items. For example, you may not
remember the first time you tried an apple, orange,
or banana, but you may clearly remember the first
time you tried a pomegranate.

Once material has been learned, it can be relearned with less effort than material not
previously learned. This holds true even if the original learning experience occurred quite
some time earlier. For example, when you were a child you may have memorized a poem.
You may have forgotten a good many of the lines, but when you review it, you spend less
time and effort memorizing the poem the second time around. Another example: When a
song is very popular, you may memorize all the words. When you hear that song several
years later, you may realize you remember a good portion of the verses and the chorus.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 75

We just learned about sensory, motor-skill and verbal memory. Does verbal memory
naturally diminish as we age? Most people would state that it happens, but let’s take a
closer look. Sometimes personal memories from a person’s youth (7 years of age to about
30 years of age) suddenly return with a flood beginning at about 50 years of age. What is
the reason for this? Most of the answers to our life questions were being formed and
defined between 7-30 years of age. This is when the significant events in your life happened.
At 50 years and older you are coming to terms with your life. How did my life turn out?
What are my regrets? Middle aged adults are reworking their memories with those
questions in mind, trying to get a sense of integrity. In other words, they are “taking stock”
of their lives and wondering if they made good decisions based on the extenuating
circumstances. They are asking: Can I be proud of what I have done in my life?

Most psychologists agree that there are at least three major kinds of memory:

* semantic memory (knowledge and facts, the seat of wisdom when making decisions
and judgments; it does not decline with age, rather it grows)

* implicit memory (for skills one exercises automatically like speaking correctly
grammatically or hitting a golf ball; they are mental activities that occur spontaneously
without making an intentional effort; they do not decline either)

* episodic memory (knowledge of specific events; it may decline but that could be
reversible)

Episodic memory is stable until the person reaches 60
years. At that point it may slowly decline but that may
be due to retirement and the fact that people don’t
usually exercise their mental faculties as much after
they stop working. Many people develop strategies
that compensate for the decline such as making lists,
leaving things in routine places, checking out memories
with others from time to time.

Here are some tips to sharpen your memory:

¢ Pay attention and be interested in the first phases of learning something. Get it right
from the start!

* Create links and associations between chunks of material. It is especially important to
anchor new data to information you already know.

* Keep your mind challenged with stimulating activity. The nerve connections that assist
memory grow stronger with use.

76 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

a=
reasoning
forming
judgements and
conclusions from
facts that are
available

cognition —
knowing,
understanding,
being conscious

of

inductive
reasoning — the
process of
beginning with a

number of specific

cases and
progressing to
form a general
conclusion or
observation

—<etO

* Concentrate on what you really need to remember, and don’t try to remember
everything.

* Schedule frequent reviews and go over tricky information that you must know.

* Memory aids can be helpful like lists, or a small notebook.

* Pace yourself when learning so that you are not trying to cover too much data all
at once.

Thinking Processes: Reasoning

Reasoning is the cornerstone of good decision-making. Reasoning is the process of
forming conclusions, judgments, or inferences from facts or premises (the specific
examples that are used as a starting point). Before reasoning is used, we must have
cognition. Cognition means the act or process of knowing, understanding data; to
become conscious of something. The reasoning process may point us to a previous
answer, or a modification of earlier solutions, or a unique idea.

There are two types of reasoning: inductive and deductive. In each case the individuals
sort the information they have at hand in two different ways in order to reach a solution.
With inductive reasoning, the individual processes information by moving from
specific individual cases to general principles. The thinker is moving from the known to
the unknown. From the specific examples that are known to them, they formulate a
new hypothesis about what future observations may reveal. Inductive reasoning uses
repeated experience with a particular situation to draw a conclusion about all similar
situations. The truth of inductive reasoning depends on the accuracy of its premises.
Inductive reasoning involves relating pieces of information to each other through
association. For example, you examine a science textbook, dictionary, atlas, and
paperback novel. From these specific examples, you reach the general principle that
books are rectangular in shape and contain pages of printed material. You have used
inductive reasoning.

Inductive Reasoning

Specific Cases General Idea

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes TT

ee
deductive
reasoning — the
process of
beginning with a
general
understanding or
general principle
and applying it to
specific cases to
see if it holds true

(0)

The other type of reasoning is known as deductive reasoning. With deductive
reasoning, the individual processes information by moving from general principles to
specific cases or consequences. Deductive reasoning is essentially a matter of putting
two and two together. The general rule is tested on separate occasions and its
application to separate cases is judged. In order to make sense of our world, we notice
patterns in the way things happen. For example, you see a strange looking vegetable in
the supermarket and it is in the section marked “varieties of squash “. The general
characteristics that make it part of the squash family apply so you know this is a specific
variety of squash. You have used deductive reasoning. Another example: Your theory is
that all wild waterfowl migrate before winter To test your theory, you examine the case
of wild ducks, geese, and swans to find out what they do.

Deductive Reasoning

ay OO

General Idea Specific Cases

Tn summary:

Inductive Reasoning: Observing specific instances to create general laws or
expectations.

Deductive Reasoning: Beginning with the general idea or the “big picture” and
applying that to specific cases.

78 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Thinking Processes: Critical Thinking

All thinking depends on knowledge. Provided we know enough, we are always
capable of critical thinking. But if we can make no sense of what we are trying to think
about, then critical thinking is impossible. Critical thinking is an attitude or frame of
mind rather than a skill. Critical thinking is a desire for or habit of determining the
authenticity, accuracy, and worth of information. Thinking critically is not a process we
switch on or off, but an inseparable part of thought on every occasion.

Critical thinkers must be ready to doubt, to challenge what is held to be true. The
opposite of a critical thinker is a passive individual who accepts whatever he/she is told.
A willingness to challenge ideas depends on a cluster of personal factors such as
perseverance, readiness to pause and reflect, openness to controversy, relationships with
other people, and image of oneself. Critical thinking challenges the status quo and
examines personal beliefs.

Critical thinking requires a sharp assessment
distinguishing between statements of fact and
statements of opinion. For example, a Labrador
retriever is a type of dog (fact); they are the most loyal
dog a person can own (opinion). Opinions may parade
as facts and so might intentional, outright lies. There is
no way we can distinguish facts and opinions except to
have a thorough knowledge of our own about the
subject.

Here are some of the key components of critical thinking.

Realization of a problem— The person is
confronted with a new situation. For example, there
is an important decision to be made about the future
and you must weigh the pros and cons of the
alternatives. Another example: You are perplexed by
conflicting accounts of the same incident or maybe
you are simply curious to know more about
something.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 79

Diagnosis or examination of the situation— What are the various ways in which you
may attack the problem? Examine each one carefully to see whether it is likely to lead
to a solution. Asking various questions and examining their possibilities occurs in the
diagnosis stage. This is a very important step. It can be approached from a variety of
strategies:

¢ looking at your problem from several new

angles °
* carefully judging the feasibility of an idea or

product @
* breaking your problem or idea into parts, o? ©

examining each part, and exploring how these

parts can be recombined in new ways

* moving step by step toward your goal O
So

* attacking a task from the perspective of the
desired solution

* rearranging existing facts and coming up with
new insights on the subject

Forming a hypothesis— This stage is more than giving a guess about the right answer.
It is a possible explanation that seems worth examining at this stage to see whether
there is evidence supporting it, in which case we may accept it. For example, you have
a theory that sibling rivalry is more intense between two brothers than two sisters.
(Actually this hypothesis seems to be true most of the time.) If such evidence does not
exist, we try another hypothesis.

Testing the hypothesis— What would be the consequences if the guess were true?
Now the individual must employ logic and deduction.

Verifying the hypothesis— This is accomplished by checking the logical
consequences against the actual facts.

Under what circumstances can previous mental “baggage” get in the way of seeking
solutions? Some past experiences may obscure new solutions for the individual.
Sometimes previous solutions to a problem outlive their usefulness and are no longer as
appropriate or as efficient as they once were. An individual’s personal context can be
another problem. That means personal values and beliefs might “blind” us to certain
solutions.

80 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=a =
functional
fixedness — the
inability to see
new or unique
uses for familiar
objects

a <((0)

Functional fixedness may also creep in to entangle
the problem solvers efforts. Functional
fixedness means the inability to see new or
alternative uses for familiar objects. For
example, if you use a cast iron frying pan to
pound a nail into the wall, you have overcome
functional fixedness because you are using the frying
pan for a unique task.

Bag of Tricks for Critical Thinkers

- understanding the basic meaning of a statement
- evaluating if the line of reasoning makes sense

- discovering contradictions in statements

- judging if a conclusion is reasonable

- assessing if statements are specific enough

- judging whether a statement is reliable

- evaluating whether definitions are adequate

- being sensitive to new ideas, problems, and issues
- respecting novelty and intuition

- taking time to be reflective (mull over ideas)

- exploring ideas beyond what is presented

- remaining open-minded and deferring judgement
- producing many ideas with ease

- shifting perspectives to study a new angle

- adding details to enhance meaning and interest

- stepping outside the rules to create original ideas

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 81

Thinking Problems

Forgetting: Forgetting has usually been viewed as a more
complex, less easily understood phenomenon than
remembering. Forgetting is an active process; it is not a
passive one where we are simply the helpless victims of
memory loss. For example, you “forget” the time you
kicked a soccer ball into a big table full of food at the
family picnic. Memory not only reproduces what has been
stored, but it also produces information on its own, which
means that memory changes some of the data when it is
brought out of storage.

What causes forgetting to occur? First, forgetting is part of the normal memory system.
It’s nature’s defence against a bombardment of too much information. When the
necessary cues or stimuli required to recall the data are not supplied, the memory
remains lost. This does not mean that the information is permanently erased, just that it
will remain dormant until a very powerful stimulus can be used to activate memory.
Sometimes “forgotten” material may sink to unconscious levels, causing emotional
conflicts for the individual. For example, if a young child is molested, that awful
memory may be “forgotten” for many years. Occasionally, certain types of brain
surgery must be performed with the patient conscious but under partial anaesthetic.
When certain areas of the brain are touched with surgical instruments, long forgotten
memories are recalled by the patient.

Learning a new piece of information is hard work. It is a bit disheartening when we
forget some of the information we have learned in the past. These factors will have an
impact on the forgetting process.

Inattention: In some cases people do not give full attention to the learning situation in
the initial stages. The information is not properly anchored in the short term memory
enabling it to move into long term memory. Therefore because of inattention, they
never learn the material properly in the first place. In the final analysis, the quality of the
original learning can never be underestimated in promoting learning and detaining
forgetting.

Retroactive inhibition: It is the belief that what we have just learned may interfere
with previous learning. Retroactive inhibition seems to cause the greatest interference
when new learning is very similar to the original learning. Because the pieces of
information are so much the same, they get mixed together. For example, you are
memorizing a grocery list for this week and once that is complete, you decide to
memorize one for next week. You may have difficulty recalling the items from the first
week by themselves if there is a lot of overlap between the two lists.

82 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
Zeigarnik effect —
the theory that
incomplete tasks
are remembered
longer than
completed tasks
=O

Proactive inhibition: It is the belief that previous learning may interfere with new
learning. The sequence of interference is reversed from that of retroactive inhibition.
The main idea in this theory is that the original learning is so powerfully fixed in the
mind that new data is less easily assimilated. For example, in English a certain letter like
‘j’ has a particular sound. Then you study Spanish and find that the sound of ‘j’ is quite
different. You may make a lot of mistakes because your instruction in the English

language dominants what you are trying to learn in Spanish.

Motivated forgetting: Motivation to complete unfinished work has been well
documented. In one experiment a group of subjects was asked to work on a number of
simple tasks. Some tasks they were allowed to finish, others were interrupted by the
experimenter before the final stages. Later the subjects were asked to remember the
tasks they were doing and surprisingly they remembered more of the unfinished tasks.
What is the reason? One explanation would be that an individual becomes involved in a
task, creating motivation to complete the task at hand. The memory is sharpened by the
motivation (and frustration) of knowing there was something left undone that the
subject wishes another chance to do. The Zeigarnik effect is the theory that incomplete
tasks are remembered longer than completed tasks. They nag at our mind until we get
them done.

A later experiment cast some new light on incomplete tasks. Subjects were given a
number of tasks, some especially difficult to do, which invariably gave them trouble
and led to some anxiety. Subjects were interrupted when part way through the difficult
tasks. Later when asked to list the tasks they were doing, the subjects remembered less
of the difficult ones because these tasks had caused anxiety and the subjects had little
hope of completing them successfully anyway. In more general terms, if material to be
learned is associated with failure at a task, the ability to recall information is reduced.
By the same token, success at a task increases the ability to recall information. What
implications does this have for people who are in key positions structuring the learning
situation for others?

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 83

=
dyslexia

reading disability
that affects all
language skills
such as reading,
writing, speaking,
and listening

i e _

Communication Problems: Dyslexia

The problem of dyslexia is the most common of all learning and communication problems. It
is estimated that about 10%-20% of the population have some form of dyslexia. It is more
likely to be a male condition by a ratio of 3:1. What does dyslexia mean? It comes from
the Latin word ‘dys’ which means bad or difficult; ‘lexia’ in Latin means language.
Dyslexia is not a thinking problem but rather a reading disability that has a carry-over
throughout the whole language program including: reading, writing, speaking and listening.
Dyslexia is not the result of brain damage or nerve damage. It is the product of a special
mode of thought and a natural reaction to confusion.

Any

There are three different categories of dyslexia: visual, auditory and a combination of
the two. Visual is the most common. The dyslexic person is prone to be a tactile, hands on
person, which means that one must touch or feel objects or in many cases to be involved
with projects in a non-abstract way. Dyslexics may display some of the following
characteristics: delay in learning to talk, inadequate spoken language, difficulty in learning
and remembering printed words, reversal of some letters (b,d,p,q) or the order of letters in
words, reversal of numbers (very common), prolonged delay in establishing right/left
handedness, confusion about directions (right/left), difficulty in recalling a desired word
when speaking or writing, deficient skills in the mechanics and organization of written
composition, and/or cramped or illegible handwriting.

Restoring a person’s self-esteem is truly the most important part of undoing dyslexia
and other learning problems. If the dyslexic person is older, he or she has lived with
their failure longer and usually their self-esteem is pretty low. Labelling a child in the
absence of any formal diagnosis is especially harmful. The dyslexia specialist first looks
tor a large gap between math skills, performance skills, spelling, writing, and/or reading
skills. Dyslexics inherently perceive more and formulate mental concepts faster
than other people. They excel in arts, architecture, engineering, strategy, and invention.
They can perceive imagination as reality. This form of intuitive thought is the
foundation of genius. Famous people with dyslexia: Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill,
Jackie Stewart (a racing driver), Tom Cruise, George Burns, Whoopi Goldberg, and
Cher.

84 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

===
attention deficit
disorder (ADD) —
poor attention
span, inability to
concentrate on
data for any
length of time,
accompanied by
fidgeting,
restlessness

a

Concentration Problems: Attention Deficit Disorder

What is Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD)? Itis characterized by a serious, persistent

difficulty with poor attention span, weak impulse control, and hyperactivity. Neurobiological
data indicates that ADD is deeply rooted in the central nervous system. A certain portion of

the brain is responsible for attention, handwriting, motor control, and inhibition responses.

The rate at which the brain uses glucose, its main energy source, was shown to be lower in
persons with ADD. However, no single factor has been established as being responsible for
triggering ADD.

This condition usually appears before seven years of age. It is far more prevalent in

males than females. ADD is often misunderstood as being willful misbehaviour, or lack
of effort at a task, or a refusal to take an interest in the world. Symptoms in 30-70% of
the patients continue into adulthood.

Here are a few of the symptoms of ADD:

fails to give close attention to details
often does not seem to listen

does not follow through with instructions
has difficulty organizing tasks

loses things

is easily distracted by outside stimuli

is forgetful of daily activities

fidgets

may talk excessively

may interrupt others

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes

85

Children with ADD are vulnerable to failure in the two most important arenas for
developmental mastery—school and peer relations. ADD has often been inaccurately
portrayed as a type of specific learning disability. It is not. Children with ADD do not
have trouble learning. However, they do have difficulty performing in school due to poor
organization, impulsiveness, and inattention. Children with ADD do not routinely show signs
of serious emotional disturbances, but they may exhibit problems with self-esteem if not
properly treated.

Adults with ADD are often undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. This can lead to low self-
esteem, increased frustration, and educational failure. Years of struggling with ADD
might increase the risk of drug abuse and depression. Adults with ADD are restless,
easily distracted, have difficulty concentrating, are impulsive and impatient, and may be
short tempered, disorganized, and have career difficulties. Adults can benefit by
structuring their environment. For example, they can use an appointment book, tape
recorder, make a list of tasks, and learn time-management skills. They can eliminate
negative self-statements and enlist a friend to provide some constructive feedback.

Note: Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) is also referred to as Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).

86 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes General Psychology 20

== —
autism — a
neurological
disorder affecting
communication
and social
interaction with
others

Oe

Interrelating Problems: Autism

Autism is a neurological brain disorder in which behaviour, communication, and social
interactions are severely disrupted. Autism is caused by an underlying physical dysfunction
within the brain or central nervous system. The chief difficulty for a child with autism seems
to lie with processing information. The brain in autistic people doesn’t function normally and
the required messages about the outside world aren’t sent or are mixed up. So the world
and its signals are confusing to them.

Autism is a disorder one is born with; there is a genetic component at work. It is not
due to poor parenting skills. True autism shows up before the age of three. Symptoms
vary greatly from individual to individual. There are probably many mildly autistic
people who have never been diagnosed. People with autism fall within a range from
mild to severe. Social and communication skills can, in the severely autistic, be almost
nonexistent. In the early years some autistics show little interest in bonding with their
parents. They may resist being hugged and may want to avoid physical contact or even
eye contact. They don’t respond normally to the senses—sounds aren’t heard, words
carry no meaning, and background noise is deafening to them. They appear to
withdraw from sensory stimulation. Often anything outside the routine is threatening
and therefore, they resist environmental changes. They appear to withdraw from
sensory stimulation. Some will have inappropriate attachments to objects or carry out
obsessive or repetitive behaviours like rocking or head banging. Unfortunately, their
obsessive behaviour does not break the log jam of unexpressed emotions. Autistic
people pay little attention to many things, but overreact to others. They may appear not
to respond to injury or obvious danger. Autistic people will do such things as repeat
words back to people, have tantrums, or get extremely upset for no apparent reason.
They are sometimes picky eaters. They have strong preferences regarding clothing.
Most children with autism do not explore and seem to lack curiosity.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 87

While autism is a lifetime condition, with
special training, supervision, and support,
many adults with autism can live and work in
the community. When treating autism, early
intervention is very important. If your child is
autistic, contact the local chapter of the
Autistic Society. Watch out for people
advertising miracle cures, or interventions that
don’t have a lot of hours one-on-one. Using
programs with intensive one-on-one therapy,
the child is constantly told to focus or pay
attention as some simple task is performed.
Sometimes these children develop strategies
to remind them to focus and pay attention like
pointing at the teacher to get them to look at
and concentrate on what the teacher is saying.
The autistic child may also have to be taught
appropriate gestures. For example, most
people ask the question, “Are you going over
there?”, and reinforce what they are saying by
pointing with their index finger The autistic
child must be taught these gestures. Watch out
for interventions that use any kind of aversion
or punishment, because the autistic child is
not a child who is being naughty. With an
intensive program, some autistic problems can
be reduced by the time a child attends school.

The Element of Colour

We often dismiss colour as a superficial, unimportant element of our environment—
unlike thinking.

Colour has an impact on our lives and may even influence the quality of our thoughts.
Everyone has their favourite colours. What colour are your bedroom walls? What are
the dominant colours in your bedroom? What clothing colours attract you first when
you are shopping?

Colour has a definite impact on your mind, on your body, energy levels, health, and on
your mood. Light energy stimulates some of the glands of our body which regulate
hormones. Colour preferences are often affected by past memories, experiences, and
associations. To a large extent, our culture affects some of the colour choices we make.
In our culture, white stands for purity, but in Japan it is a colour associated with
mourning. Red is the bridal colour in both India and China.

88 Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Our eyes see the colour, but our entire body senses it because blind people often have
very similar colour associations. Which colours promote thinking? Well, red stimulates
brain development in the early years of infancy, helping the brain make connections
between the two hemispheres. Yellow stimulates memory and is the colour that first
catches our attention. It has been reported to stimulate the left hemisphere of the brain.
The colour brown enhances conversation. Green helps us feel accepted and welcomed
(except for lime green which is too intense). Light blue has a calming affect, and
thinking related activities are best undertaken in an atmosphere of quiet tranquillity.

The number one colour choice for clothing across the population is blue. Blue is the
colour of authority and so is black. Black demands respect for its sense of power. For
example, many police uniforms are a shade of dark blue. In Canada, both the judge and
lawyers wear long, flowing black robes when they are in court. A common colour
dominating fast-food restaurants is orange because it stimulates the appetite. How many
fast food outlets can you think of with bright orange as a dominant colour?

Pink has some interesting effects on the body. A colour called bubble gum pink has
been used effectively in hospitals, drug centres, and prisons to calm people. It has been
reported that when left in a pink room for a long time, people get drowsy and may even
fall asleep. Pink is the beauty colour and has the effect of making foods taste sweeter to
us.

Think about the power of colour in some of the decisions you make. It is not
simply a secondary factor, it has more significance than you realize.

>
@
@
“\

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 89

90

Summary

This lesson was a challenging one. Here are some of the things we learned.

To summarize:

¢ First memories usually begin about ages 4 or 5 when the child has developed
a language which helps to record memories.

* The brain is a very complex organ which is changed by learning experiences
which are unique to each individual.

¢ The brain analyzes information as it is presented, but also creates novel ideas
ofits own.

¢ The brain has 2 hemispheres, left and right, each with its own special abilities.

* These experiences are linked to the right brain: looking at the whole picture,
intuition, feelings, creativity, visual awareness, and random processing of data.

* These experiences are linked to the left brain: language, logical thought, verbal
expression, orderly and sequential processing of data.

« Language uses symbols to convey meaning in the communication process.

¢ Thinking is an essential implicit behaviour that organizes our reality and plans
in advance the activities we do.

* Memory can be divided into three major types: sensory, motor-skill, and
verbal.

* Our verbal memory system has two forms: short term which is the initial
and somewhat brief contact with the material, and long term which is the
data that is stored more permanently.

* Reasoning is the process of forming judgments or conclusions from the
data we have at hand.

« Inductive reasoning—the person begins with many specific examples and
reaches general conclusion.

* Deductive reasoning—the person begins with a basic rule or principle and
tests it out with specific cases to see if the rule applies.

* Critical thinking is not necessarily a set of skills but an attitude or desire to
determine the worthiness of an idea or concept.

* Critical thinking occurs in these stages:—a problem is established, it is
studied regarding various possibilities, a hypothesis about a correct
solution is stated, tested, and verified.

¢ Forgetting occurs when we have not properly and thoroughly learned
material in initial stages.

Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

¢ Forgetting is also possible with retroactive inhibition and proactive
inhibition.
* We may be “motivated” to forget difficult tasks that are not completed, but

we are strongly motivated to finish incomplete tasks we know we can
handle.

¢ Dyslexia is not a thinking problem, but rather a reading disability that
manifests itself in visual and auditory functioning.

¢ Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) is not a problem with understanding
material as much as an inability to sustain concentration on a task for any
extended time.

¢ Autism is a neurological disorder hampering communication and social
interaction with others.

* Because autistic people have difficulty processing information about the
outside world, they retreat to an “inner world of their own where they
may engage in repetitive behaviours— rocking the body, staring at
objects, and following set routines.

* Colours have an effect on our emotional state and have an impact on our
behaviours as well.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 3 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Two: Learning and Cognitive Processes 91

SECTION THREE

Studying Behaviour

Lesson 1: Roles and Group Influence

Overview

In the first part of this lesson you will examine what roles are and how they influence
our behaviour. Since human beings are social animals, the influence of others is a major
focus of the later part of this lesson. Groups of one kind or another play a tremendous part
in shaping our attitudes, our thoughts, and ultimately our behaviour.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 93
