Lesson 4: Psychosis

Overview

In Lesson 3 you examined some of the less severe social and personality disturbances
known as neurosis. Psychosis is even more of a challenge to treat, and if possible, to
control. What is psychosis? How does it compare with neurosis? How does a person
become psychotic? Psychosis sounds very dangerous and threatening. Are there any
dangers involved with these illnesses? The topic of psychosis raises a number of
concerns that you will examine in this lesson.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 209

Lesson 4 will focus on these topics:

* Defining Psychosis

* Misconceptions About Psychosis
* Panic Attacks

* Paranoia

* Manic-Depression

¢ Schizophrenia

¢ Self-injurious Behaviour

* Organic Psychosis

¢ Alzheimer’s Disease

¢ Treatments: What Is Working and What Is Not Working
* Multiple Personality

Defining Psychosis

Psychosis can he described as a serious pathological (abnormal) state resulting in a loss of
contact with reality. A person who suffers from such a severe mental illness is called
psychotic. Psychotics experience periods of time when they are unable to make adequate
distinctions between what is real and what is not. They may develop distorted
interpretations of events. Thought patterns and emotions are abnormal which interferes with
their daily functioning. Psychotics will rarely admit that their actions are abnormal or unusual.
Because they are out of touch with reality, psychotics are unaware of the extent of their
mental disorders and are therefore not alarmed by their conditions.

How can we distinguish psychosis from neurosis? Let’s summarize the distinctive
characteristics of each one ona chart.

210 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

a
predisposition —
the “built in”
tendency to
develop a
particular
behaviour

Oe

Neurosis Psychosis

* only asegment of the personality is * the entire personality is affected
involved * results from a malfunctioning of the

* emotional problems are the key brain

* does not involve a severe * intellectual ability may be hampered

deterioration in intellectual capacity * dramatic mood disturbances affect all

* emotional disturbances only affect a aspects of daily routines

limited range of experiences * cannot function adequately in

* day-to-day life continues ordinary society

What are some of the general characteristics of a psychotic person? Please remember that
only someone with expert training in psychology can give a professional diagnosis. Here are
some relevant points:

¢ lack of contact with reality

* extreme depression or excitement

* partial or complete withdrawal from social contacts with others
* confused ideas about people or objects

¢ hallucinations and/or delusions

* inaminority of cases there may be hostility

What might cause people to become psychotic? There are two very different opinions
on this question. First, a predisposition to some types of psychoses (plural of
psychosis) may be inherited. That means a person has a “tendency” to have a certain
condition, and if the right circumstances prevail, the illness will develop. Itis yet
unclear how strong the hereditary factor may be. Body chemistry (e.g. blood and urine
samples) differ between the normal individual and the psychotic. Body chemistry also
shows a variation between one psychotic and another depending on the particular
disorder.

A second group of factors instrumental in the formation of psychotic conditions are
environmental and social factors. Many people with mental illnesses come from very
abusive home backgrounds. Chronic stress and conflicts in the child’s life, if severe
enough, could lead to one or another form of psychosis.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 2i1

Misconceptions About Psychosis

In earlier times, psychosis was associated with sin and evil spirits. The general public still
have lingering false ideas about psychosis. Many people are uninformed enough to consider
ita disgrace if anyone in the family has any history of mental illness. If someone we know
has a serious physical illness like heart disease or cancer, we don’t say that condition is
disgraceful.

The person suffering from psychosis requires just as much care and understanding as
the one with a physical illness. Punishment or rejection will not help.

In Lesson 3 you learned how hurtful it is to carelessly apply labels to a person suffering
from neurosis. Labelling someone psychotic can be even more upsetting. People who are
labelled psychotic are treated as psychotic and thus continue to respond in psychotic ways.
Therefore if the person is mislabelled psychotic, the results can be very damaging.

stigma — a label A stigma is a label associated with disgrace, dishonour, or
of disgrace or shame. For example, if someone serves time in jail, that is
ishonour considered a stigma. The stigma or sense of shame may also
—=e Oe

spread to the person’s family. For example, the parents are
out of work, so the family is poor. Therefore, they require
social assistance. That would be considered a stigma as
well. Everyone in the family falls into the same negative
category. Sometimes the stigma or mark of disgrace is
justified because the person is truly evil or dangerous.
Sometimes the person is saddled with a negative label they
don’t deserve.

From what has been said about society’s opinions about psychosis, we conclude that
psychological disturbances come under the cloud of being a stigma. Because the
misconception still exists that psychotics are evil and therefore deserve their situation, there
is a tendency to punish those individuals more severely. The punisher doesn’t sympathize or
identify with the psychotic person. Another misconception is that the psychotic person is
dangerous. A few psychotics must be guarded carefully, but many of the rest are nonviolent
and calm. Most psychotics are more of a danger to themselves than they are to anyone else.

Can some of the severe forms of psychosis be cured? Perhaps many of them cannot be
cured in the strictest sense, but they can be controlled with proper medication, counselling,
and therapy. Approximately 70 to 80% of all mental patients can be released from
institutions and satisfactorily adjust to normal life. However, their treatment must be
monitored to ensure their progress toward mental health continues.

Now that we have identified psychosis in very general terms, let’s go on to study some
of the specific forms of psychosis.

212 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

===
panic attack — a
severe form of
anxiety causing a
person to feel
terrified and
immobilized

see

Panic Attacks

Panic attack victims are not truly psychotic. However, panic attacks are included in the
lesson on psychosis because they are an intense, crippling emotional experience that
deeply alters the lives of the people affected. Panic attacks can prevent people from
coping with life; they destroy people’s daily routines. In between attacks, people lead a
somewhat normal life, but they are always in a state of anxiety not knowing when it
may strike again.

What are panic attacks? In Lesson 3 (Neurosis) you learned about excessive anxiety
and how that can cause problems for those who experience it. Panic attacks are more
serious than just a case of “bad nerves” or mild distress. People who suffer from panic
attacks stress the terrible out-of-control feelings that overtake them. When a full-fledged
panic attack occurs, the victims often mistake their reaction to a severe heart attack.
Panic attacks result in levels of anxiety that are so intense that the victim is terrified and
immobilized.

Panic attacks can appear at any age, but young adults are subject to them more
frequently. Some people may experience a few isolated attacks that do not develop into
a panic disorder which is more chronic and more serious. If the disorder is untreated, it
may become very disabling for the person. The fear of a panic attack can restrict a
person’s everyday activities and may even keep them home-bound. (See Lesson 3 on
Phobias. Agoraphobia may affect two or three people in the same family.)

Causes

We have hinted at some of the factors that may cause a panic attack, but let’s examine
them more closely. Physical and psychological causes of panic disorder work together.
Current research supports the theory that anxiety disorders may be the result of genetics
(abnormal biochemistry) or can be the result of faulty thinking. Studies with twins have
confirmed the possibility of “genetic inheritance” of the disorder.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 213

In general, panic attacks seem to be linked with major turning points in life that are
potentially stressful. For example, getting a divorce and losing your family, becoming
chronically unemployed, or finding you are unable to pursue one of your favourite interests
would all be major transitions. When stress lowers a person’s resistance, the underlying
physical predisposition kicks in and triggers an attack. Although initially attacks may come
out of the blue, eventually sufferers may actually trigger an attack when their fear of having
an attack overpowers them. For example, if you fear your panic attack might appear when
you are on the balcony of a building because you fear heights, the most intense fear is the
fear of having an attack itself and not the fear of being on a balcony. Many people with
panic disorders display situational avoidance. In simple terms that means they go out of
their way to avoid any experiences that they believe are sensitive for them.

In summary, here are some factors contributing to panic attacks: stress, diet, bad
breathing habits, grief, a bad heart, unique brain chemistry, and being a perfectionist.

Symptoms

In general, panic attacks or anxiety attacks are a violent experience. People commonly
report that they feel like they are going insane. People experience the helpless feeling
that the symptoms will strike repeatedly and without warning. The symptoms may
occur in a wide variety of situations—they can even happen while the person is asleep.

What are some of the symptoms that occurring during a panic attack?

* People usually experience difficulty breathing.

¢ People cannot think clearly. Wrong signals are sent from the brain. Clear thinking
stops altogether.

¢ Adrenaline is discharged into the system, the pupils dilate, hands and feet get
cold, and there is a tendency to sweat.

¢ There is reduced oxygen supply to the heart causing an increase in heart rate. People
often report that they feel they are experiencing a heart attack or stroke, that they are
losing their mind, or are on the verge of death. Blood pressure may be affected
causing the person to faint.

¢ Because of lack of oxygen throughout the body, the person feels weak, confused,
and perhaps like they are suffocating.

¢ There are strong feelings of impending doom and paralyzing fear.

* Other physiological responses are hyperventilation, tremors, confusion, fatigue,
and tingling in fingers or toes.

214 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

A recent study showed that people who suffer from panic disorders are more prone to
alcohol and other substance abuse. In addition they are greater suicide risks, spend less time
in satisfying hobbies, tend to be financially dependent on others, and are afraid of driving
more than a short distance away from home. Panic disorder often leads to other
complications such as phobias and depression.

Treatments

Panic disorder is highly treatable with a variety of available therapies. However,
therapies must focus on all the victim’s needs—physical, psychological, and
physiological. It is not unusual for panic attacks to initially be misdiagnosed as
something else.

If you suffer repeated attacks (four or more) you should definitely seek help. The first
part of therapy is largely informational. Many people are greatly helped by simply
understanding exactly what panic disorder is, and how many others suffer from it. Try
to find a therapist in your area and ask about their background experience in treating
panic attacks in particular.

Relaxation techniques are useful in helping someone get through an attack. These
techniques include retraining in proper breathing and positive visualization. When a
person is not breathing properly, they aren’t using their diaphragms effectively. They
may be breathing shallowly and too rapidly. Over breathing creates a shift in the body’s
chemical balance making it too alkaline.

In some cases medications may be needed to treat panic anxiety. Antianxiety
medications like benzodiazephine may be prescribed as well as antidepressants. Finally
a support group can be very helpful to some people.

A famous person who has admitted to having problems with panic attacks is the singer

Naomi Judd who used to make recordings and perform in concerts with her daughter,
Wynonna.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 215

(0) ea
paranoia — false
reasoning leading
to false
conclusions about
what is taking
place

delusions — false
beliefs based on
inaccurate ideas

hallucinations —
false sense
perceptions based
on inaccurate
feedback from the
senses

Oe

Paranoia

Paranoia means false reasoning. Most authorities believe that the basic source of
paranoia is the great sense of dissatisfaction, inferiority, and failure in meeting the goals
of the parents. Delusions are a major part of paranoia.

Let’s take a minute to compare delusions and hallucinations. Delusions are false
beliefs—a person reaches the wrong conclusions about something. For example, a
delusion would be that I believe that my neighbour is spying and plotting against me.
Hallucinations are false sense perceptions—a person receives information through the
senses which is not accurate. For example, a hallucination would be that I see a misty figure
close by me and can hear it calling my name at all hours of the day and night.

Three types of delusions that may occur with paranoia are:

* Delusions of reference—For example, two people are sharing a joke by the water
fountain. The paranoid person feels sure they are making fun of him/her.

¢ Delusions of grandeur—For example, the person believes he is a member of the
Royal Family, or she believes she is a distinguished scientist.

* Delusions of persecution—For example, the person believes that spying devices
have been inserted in their home to listen to what they are saying.

Symptoms

Someone with paranoia feels hypersensitive and feels resentful at the slightest
provocation. They are defensive, domineering, humourless, and critical. Patients
suffering from paranoia are usually of good intelligence and are able to express very
clearly how they feel.

Treatments

No adequate treatment has been found. Some psychiatrists advocate keeping patients in
the community unless their behaviour is disturbing or dangerous since confinement in a
hospital may arouse further resentment and make them even more suspicious that
people are “out to get them”. Tranquillizers are sometimes helpful. Electroshock
therapy may be tried in an attempt to break up their delusional thinking. Often,
however, the paranoiac is simply left alone and people learn to keep their distance.
Acquaintances of paranoiacs regard them as queer, obnoxious, and difficult.

216 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

I=
manic-depression
— (bipolar
depression) a
condition of
emotional
extremes between
feelings of elation
to feelings of
despair

ee <<<((0)))>

Manic-Depression

In Lesson 3 on Neurosis, we discussed depression. Another type of depressive disorder
is manic-depressive illness also known as bipolar depression because the person
affected displays moods that are different as day and night. Manic-depressive illness
involves cycles of depression along with cycles of elation or mania. Sometimes the
mood switches are dramatic and rapid, but most often they are gradual.

Causes

Studies have indicated that people with the illness have a somewhat different genetic
makeup than those who do not get ill. The reverse is not true: people with that genetic
makeup do not automatically have manic-depression. Studies have been done regarding
the imbalance of the brain chemicals noradrenaline and serotonin. But additional factors
such as a stressful environment are also involved.

Symptoms

Exaggerated mood change is the most outstanding feature of manic-depression. One
psychologist has described it as the “psychosis of emotional extremes’. The behaviour
of the manic-depressive person varies with the individual. In some cases the excitement
phase predominates; for others the depression phase is more intense. It usually starts in
adult life before the age of 35.

Most manic-depressive people are either manic or depressive but not both. An
individual with this mental disorder often has high achievement standards along with
extreme feelings of guilt and worthlessness if their goals are not met. The manic-
depressive person may turn hostility and anger inward where it becomes a destructive
force rather than outwardly expressing these feelings.
Mania

Usually in the manic or excited phase there is a great
sense of elation; the individual seems extremely
pleased with themselves. The manic patient
resembles an intoxicated person in many ways being
talkative, cheerful, and humorous one minute, then
suddenly becoming hostile and angry. Other
characteristics include unrealistic highs in self-
esteem, great energy increases, increased talking
(cannot be interrupted), distractibility (attention
moves constantly from one thing to another),
thoughts of suicide, and high risk taking behaviour.
Mania often affects thinking, judgment, and social
behaviour in ways that cause serious problems and embarrassment. For example, a
person might suddenly decide to sell their home and move to Hawaii when in a manic
phase.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 217

Depression

The depressed phase is very different. Thought and talk alike seem to be slowed down.
Sadness and self-accusation mark the general mood, and in some cases it is necessary to
guard the individual from suicide. Depression may occur in three stages of severity. These
stages are mild, acute, and finally depressive stupor marked by immobility and
speechlessness. Other characteristics include frequent complaints of illness, major changes
in eating or sleeping patterns, persistent sadness, frequent crying, and low energy level.

Treatment

Effective treatment for manic-depressive illness usually includes education of the patient and
family about the illness, and psychotherapy (counselling with a psychologist). Medication
such as lithium and a group of drugs known as tricyclic antidepressants have been effective.
ECT or electroconvulsive shock is sometimes used especially if depression is severe. In
recent years, ECT has been much improved. The treatment is given in the hospital under
sedation so that people receiving ECT do not feel pain. (More will be said about ECT later
in this lesson.)

Usually after a few weeks or a few months, the manic-depressive individual makes a
good recovery and is able to resume their regular work. Attacks may recur in three out
of four eases. But in most instances, patients themselves or their friends notice the signs
in time so that these people may be put under medical care. Recovery rate has been
recorded at 90% or higher.

218 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=a
schizophrenia — a
serious form of
psychosis
involving loss of
contact with
reality, delusions,
dulling of the
emotions, hearing
voices

anhedonia — the
inability to
experience
pleasure

ae

Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia involves a serious brain malfunction that greatly disturbs feelings,
perceptions, and rational thoughts. It is the most common of the major mental illnesses.
It carries a strong social stigma. Schizophrenia occurs in 1% of the general population,
but children with one schizophrenic parent have 10 times more of a chance of
developing the mental condition. Approximately 1/3 will have only one episode during
a lifetime (acute schizophrenia), about 1/3 will have recurring episodes but will be
relatively normal in between, and 1/3 will have symptoms for a lifetime (chronic
schizophrenia). Often schizophrenic symptoms appear in young men and women
between 15 and 30 years of age.

When something happens to “normal” people, they respond with appropriate emotions.
When a person develops schizophrenia, there is a gulf between a certain behaviour and
the appropriate emotional response to go with it. Anhedonia or the inability to experience
pleasure is also common with this condition.

Now let’s take a closer look at how schizophrenia develops. True schizophrenia is a
condition which evolves gradually over an extended period of time. Distorted thought
and behaviour patterns become entrenched, making a return to good mental health very
difficult. The first stage of schizophrenia or period of breakdown is very disturbing to
the individual. Confusion, anxiety, and panic are the individual’s reactions to the
strange things that seem to happen at the onset of schizophrenia. In the second stage,
the schizophrenic has reached the point where they have grown accustomed to their
symptoms. By the third stage, the condition has worsened to the point that it is known as the
“burned out” phase. Sometimes the individual becomes apathetic and responds to life’s
situations in very basic, simple terms.

Causes

What are some possible causes of schizophrenia? First, it is not caused by childhood
experiences or by poor parenting. Most researchers believe that both a biological
predisposition and environmental factors interact to determine who becomes
schizophrenic. Some scientist believe there is evidence that a chemical imbalance in the
body may be a factor in some cases of schizophrenia. The control centre of the brain
which acts like a switchboard for incoming data malfunctions. It is thought there may
be an excess of dopamine in the brain. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that facilitates
the movement of impulses or messages from one neuron in the brain to another. Drugs
that treat schizophrenia are neuroleptics which block dopamine and quiet the nerve
pathways in the brain thus reducing delusions and hallucinations. In some cases it is
possible that a viral infection or head injury may play a role in the illness.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 219

Heredity may be responsible in another sense in that the person inherits a predisposition
to schizophrenia. Schizophrenia may develop when stress from the environmental
situation combines with the heredity component. Stress can trigger or worsen the
symptoms when the illness is already present.

Symptoms

Personality changes are a major factor in recognizing schizophrenia. There is a loss of feeling
or emotions accompanied by a lack of interest and motivation. Changes occur in thought
patterns as the person drifts away from reality. Thinking may be coloured by delusions and
false beliefs. The person often believes their thoughts are being controlled by someone or
even broadcast to others through a TV set, for example. People with schizophrenia often
“hear voices in their heads’. Sometimes the voices are threatening. Sensations are distorted.
Sometimes they feel nothing—not even real pain. They mistrust most people including those
people with whom they have close ties and they lack feelings of empathy toward others.
Schizophrenics appear to have deep longings for protection and dependency. They seem
incapable of sustained activity in fulfilling a specific goal. Schizophrenics may feel free
floating and nonexistent as a person. They have an altered sense of self which means they
lose sense of who they really are.

Early warning signs for family and friends to watch for can be helpful in getting early
treatment. Social withdrawal is a key symptom. Other symptoms include:

¢ deterioration of personal hygiene
* excessive fatigue or the inability to sleep

¢ flat emotions or inability to express emotions
appropriate for the situation

* flat, emotionless gaze (described as reptile-
like)

* unexpected hostility

* unusual sensitivity to stimuli (noise and light)

* sensitivity to being touched by others

¢ thoughts may “race”

¢ bizarre behaviour and irrational statements

Schizophrenia has many different categories each
with its own symptoms. With paranoid
schizophrenia, delusions are prominent.
Hebephrenic schizophrenia is characterized by
intellectual disorganization, silliness, and absurd
ideas.

220 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Geneyral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

EE

catatonic
schizophrenia —
the body reacts to
psychosis by
freezing in
various poses

excited phase

the stage of
catatonia marked
by constant
motion and
continual talking

stupor phase — the

stage of catatonia
marked by rigid,
immobile, and
expressionless
pose

— =e

Catatonic schizophrenia is perhaps one of the
most fascinating behavioural disorders. Catatonia or
muscular rigidity sets in more rapidly than in the
other schizophrenias. Vivid hallucinations occur. In
the excited phase of catatonia, the patient is ina
constant state of physical motion accompanied by
general over activity and perpetual talking. In the
stupor phase, the individual may become
expressionless, may refuse to communicate and may
assume an unusual pose. For example, if the
individual’s arm is raised and extended by someone
else, the arm may remain for an hour or more in the
position in which it was placed. In the stupor phase
the patient is still alert and aware, but remains
immobile. Although the individual’s body is inactive it
is not limp and the schizophrenic will resist any
attempt to change the body position.

Treatments

Because schizophrenic behaviour is unpredictable, the individual is often required to be
hospitalized for treatment. Such precautions ensure protection for both the individual
themselves and for those around them. Patients who have improved sufficiently after
treatment are able to return to the community, but they may still show some signs of
disturbance. Assistance from family and friends is important for the schizophrenic. When this
is lacking, often they fail to take medication, fail to find steady employment, and end up as
one of the many of the homeless “street-people” in our society. It is the second highest type
of mental illness for suicide risks. There is no cure for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia has been
treated primarily with antipsychotic medications which sufferers must take for the rest of
their lives.

A crisis is defined as the time when the person experiences a severe break with reality. If
you are with a schizophrenic person during a crisis episode, follow these hints to calm the
person and allow him/her to focus on you and be cooperative. Decrease all detractions such
as a TV set being on. Speak slowly and clearly. Repeat the message until the person
understands. Get the person to a hospital as quickly as possible so they can receive medical
treatment.

Many major cities across Canada have support groups. Patients or their families should
contact their local schizophrenic society for more information.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 221

(0) aaa
self-mutilation —
injuring the body
as a means of
relieving severe
stress and pain

ae

Self-Injurious Behaviour

Self-injurious behaviour is included in the lesson on psychosis because it is an extreme way
to cope with a psychological/emotional problem. Self-injurious behaviour refers to any
deliberate behaviour that can cause tissue damage such as open wounds, bruises, and
redness without the conscious intent to commit suicide. Other names may also be used like
sel/-mutilation or slashing. Who self-injures? Three times more women than men engage in
self-injury. Often this behaviour begins during late childhood and early adolescence. These
personality factors may be involved: inability to express emotional needs, rapid mood
swings, inability to tolerate intense feelings, and having a perfectionist approach to tasks they
must do.

There are three major types of self-injury:

* Major self-mutilation — the most extreme and uncommon kind, a great deal of
tissue is destroyed.

¢ Stereotypic self-mutilation — fixed or rhythmic pattern such as repeated head-
banging.

¢ Superficial or moderate self-mutilation — relatively little tissue is damaged. Injury
may occur by cutting the skin with razors, skin carving, burning, interference with
wound healing, needle sticking, self-punching, or scratching. Self-injury can
become addictive; some people find it difficult to give up the practice.

Causes

People who self-mutilate often have a history of violence and/or sexual abuse in their
past that they haven’t told anyone about. They may be drug or alcohol abusers or have
parents who were heavily involved in alcoholism. They may be devastated by the loss
of a parent through death or divorce. Sometimes they are confined to a residential
institution like a prison. These women feel numb and out of touch with life. Self-injury
is done to reconfirm the presence of one’s body. Some people use the expression, “I
had to pinch myself to see if I was dreaming”. Self-injurious behaviour is somewhat
similar—it is a check to confirm that they’re still alive.

Self-injury is anger turned inward. The common element that triggers self-injury is
anxiety from overwhelming psychological distress—intense anger, guilt, frustration, or
self-hatred. It feels safer and more controlled to direct anger at themselves than at their
abusers. Besides release of tension, self-injury converts unbearable emotional pain into
manageable physical pain. One psychologist proposed the theory that children who are
not nurtured and protected fail to learn to protect themselves. The biological theories
focus on chemical imbalance in the body. Drugs can affect neurotransmitters in the
brain which in turn affect how we manage our own self-harm behaviours. Sometimes
the reasons for self-injury may be social in nature—to seek attention, to control others,
or to avoid doing a task. (These would not be the major reasons for self-injury.)

222 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Symptoms

What is slashing? Slashing involves using something
sharp like a razor, knife, or broken glass to cut your
skin, usually your arms. It’s fairly common in prisons.
Women and girls are most likely to slash, especially if
they are survivors of sexual abuse. The physical pain
seems to reduce the emotional pain the women are
feeling.

Moderate self-injury can be a symptom of many
disorders including post-traumatic stress disorder,
multiple personality disorder, eating disorders,
substance abuse, and clinical depression. The person
has a repeated impulse to destroy or alter body tissue.
There is increasing tension immediately before, and a
sense of relief following the act of self-harm. There is
no association between the self-harm act and actual
suicide.

Treatment

If you are prone to self-injury, stay away from the materials that are usually used for self-
injury. Remind yourself about the long term consequences like the scars. Stay away from
drugs and alcohol. Stay in the company of others. Find new ways to cope with your feelings
like mediation, exercise, and healthy hobbies. Learn to nurture yourself. When you are very
angry, vigorous physical activity may help. Visit a therapist to help express your anger and
make changes in your life. There are more socially acceptable forms of self-mutilation such
as piercing the ears, nose, naval skin, and other body parts. Most people who self-harm
have problems with low self-esteem and are disgusted by their own self-injury behaviour.

If you are a friend of someone who self-injures, don’t shame the person. Understand that

they are under a lot of stress and give them your support. Stay with the person until the
impulse to self-injure passes and encourage them not be alone.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 223

EE
organic psychosis
— behavioural
disorders caused
by damage to the
body parts

ee <((0))

=a
alcohol psychosis
—a type of
organic psychosis
that occurs when
a person is
addicted to
alcohol

— ee

Organic Psychosis

Organic psychosis is any behavioural disorder that can be attributed to damage or disease
in the body that seriously affects one’s mental state. Senile psychosis is the term for the
psychological disorder associated with the organic brain damage that occurs in old age. The
term senility is applied to the general deterioration that may occur with brain damage due to
hardening of the walls of the arteries which results in a decreased circulation of blood in the
brain. You will study Alzheimer’s Disease (senile psychosis) in more detail in the next part of
this lesson.

Alcohol Psychosis

Alcohol Psychosis is another form of organic psychosis
which has its origin in excessive alcoholic use over long
periods of time. Alcoholism is one of the most serious
forms of addiction. Heavy drinking sometimes causes
deterioration of physical health with damage to the liver
and brain cells. Psychological functioning is disrupted as
well because concentration, memory, and judgment
frequently suffer. Alcohol is a depressant not a stimulant.
The chronic alcohol user is less alert, responds slowly,
and is less dependable.

Here are some mental illnesses that are basically alcoholic in origin. Delirium tremens or
D.T.s is a behaviour disorder of a chronic alcoholic brought on by withdrawal from alcohol
and marked by body trembling, hallucinations, irritability, apprehension, and confused
thoughts. For example, the victim may see the walls covered with horrible insects, or see
toads or snakes on the floor. Acute hallucinosis is very similar to delirium tremens. For
example, the victim hears voices talking, accusing, and threatening. In other words, the
person experiences auditory hallucinations when they have acute hallucinosis. Korsakoff’s
psychosis is a behaviour disorder of some older chronic alcoholics that is marked by an
inability to remember previous experiences, especially events that have just taken place.
Patients fill in the gaps in their memories by inventing fantasies. It is thought to be caused in
part by dietary deficiencies.

Alcoholism may be treated with chlordiazepoxide to control the anxiety, restlessness, and
insomnia seen in the initial stages of abstinence from alcohol. Multivitamin medications are
also helpful. Disulfiram or antabuse is a drug that will make the alcoholic very ill if they try to
drink while taking the drug. It may prevent the recovering alcoholic from impulsively taking a
drink because they know it will make them violently ill.

Alcoholics’ Anonymous is an organization composed of problem drinkers who have given
up alcohol or who are trying to do so. In that sense, Alcoholics’ Anonymous uses group
therapy to discuss problems and offer support in a social setting with lots of personal
contact.

224 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Geneyral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
dementia — a
group of diseases
of the brain
characterized by
loss of
intellectual
abilities (memory,
thinking skills),
personality
changes, and
deterioration of
physical
coordination

ee <«<((0)))

Alzheimer’s Disease

Most often Alzheimer’s affects people 60 and over,
but it has also been known to strike people in their
early 40s and 50s. About 300,000 Canadians are
afflicted. Dementia is a decline in intellectual ability
severe enough to interfere with a person’s daily
routine. It can have many causes. Alzheimer’s is the
most common disorder. Other conditions that
produce dementia are strokes, Huntington’s chorea,
Parkinson’s disease, depression, drug interactions,
stress (due to serious health problems or death of a
spouse, for example), thyroid problems, and vitamin
deficiencies (B-12). Memory loss and changes in
mood and behaviour are early signs of dementia.
Early and accurate diagnosis is essential to
determine the cause of the dementia.

Causes

Alzheimer’s Disease is characterized by the progressive degeneration of brain cells. Cause
of the disease is not known, but heredity and environmental toxins are suspected. Only 5 to
10% of the Alzheimer’s Disease cases are believed to be caused by purely genetic factors.
Groups of nerve endings in the outer layer of the brain degenerate and disrupt the passage
of electrochemical signals between cells. Brain shrinkage occurs because many nerve cells
have been destroyed.

Symptoms

In the initial stages, the individual experiencing Alzheimer’s Disease exhibits minor symptoms
that are often attributed to other illnesses. One of the most dominant symptoms is a
progressive deterioration of memory, judgement, and concentration. Mental powers such as
reasoning and verbal skills are affected as well as physical coordination. A spouse ora
friend may notice changes in spending habits, neglect of nutrition, sanitation, grooming, home
care, or unusual mood swings or increased alcohol consumption. Gradually the individual
becomes more forgetful. As memory loss increases, changes also appear in personality,
mood, and behaviour. People with dementia have short attention spans, walk around a lot,
seldom sit still for long, and are often agitated.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 225

=e
medical model
the theory that
mental disorders
are a type of
disease arising
froma
malfunction
within the person

psychosocial
model — the
theory that mental
disorders are a
type of disease
arising form an
interaction
between the
person and the
social
environment

eclectic view —a
psychological
theory built on
ideas from a
number of
different theories

ee <<<((0))>

Treatment

It may be helpful to provide simple memory aids to
assist the Alzheimer’s patient such as a prominent
calendar, lists of daily tasks, and directions about how
to use common items in the home. Understandably,
people with Alzheimer’s Disease find it difficult to
comprehend the changes in their thinking and behaviour
which may lead to frustrations.

An experimental drug called THA is undergoing testing
in the United States to treat the disease. It may help
reduce memory loss and other symptoms in some
patients. Currently prevention or cure is unknown. It is
fatal.

Recently, a nurse who has been a long term worker with the elderly, discovered an unusual
therapeutic idea. A life-size doll about the size of a year old baby, with a fairly realistic-
looking face brought some comfort to Alzheimer’s patients. They could hold and hug the
doll; it distracted them when they were restless and agitated; it provided something to talk to
while they were alone; or they could talk to others about the doll. Having the doll helped
them reminisce a little about their younger days.

Treatments: What Is Working And What Is Not Working

There are two major perspectives about abnormal behaviour. One is the medical model, the
other is known as the psychosocial model. The main premise of the medical model is that
mental disorders are a type of disease or illness arising from a malfunction inside the person.
The treatment prescribed, which could be psychotherapy or drugs, is aimed at changing the
patient’s behaviour and attitudes. The psychosocial mode! focuses on the interaction
between the individual and the person’s social environment. The self-concept is given careful
consideration. Mending relationships within the patient’s social environment is the main
target for treatment suggested by the psychosocial model.

Before we become too involved in discussing various methods of therapy, we should be
aware that most therapists prefer the eclectic approach. You may remember it from
Lesson 1. What does that mean? It is a very open-minded and flexible approach,
surveying a wide range of theories and choosing the best ideas from here and there
along a broad radius of ideas. The result is an integrated type of therapy where various
techniques are adapted to suit each individual case, but a large range of possible
theories are explored in the process. For example, the psychobiological approach
incorporates information from the biological, psychological, and social realm that may
have contributed to the behavioural disorder. It covers a vast scope of possibilities.

226 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Geneyral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

== —
somatotherapy —
the treatment of
mental illness by
drugs, shock

sometimes surgery

electroconvulsive
shock (ECT) —
treatment of a
mental condition
by sending a
shock through the
brain

Oe

Group
Therapy

Faradic
Stimulation

Psychoanalysis

Ataractics

Prefrontal

Lobotomy Silag9

Deprivation

Physical Treatment of Behavioural Disorders

Somatotherapy refers to the treatment of the body for behavioural disorders with such
methods as shock treatments, surgery, or drugs. Shock treatment has received mixed
reactions. For a time, the use of insulin shock was popular. An overdose of insulin was
administered causing a patient to become unconscious. When the brain lacks sugar
through the process of shock, normal pathways to the brain are reintroduced and
fortified. Therefore insulin shock returns the patient to normal functioning.

Electroconvulsive therapy or ECT is another type of physical treatment. The
electroconyulsive shock is induced by attaching two electrodes to each side of the
head and passing an electric current through them producing convulsions in the patient.
Following this, a state of coma occurs lasting from several minutes to several hours. It is
not certain which particular aspects of the shock process brings about positive
changes—the coma, the changes in the nervous system from the shock, the violent
psychological reaction, or the idea that the patient has taken the shock as punishment
which reduces their sense of guilt.

Today’s form of shock therapy is different than it was many years ago. It has undergone
many refinements since it was first introduced in 1938. It is now called faradic
stimulation. A small, battery-operated “shock stick” with less electrical current than a
pacemaker is used. Today, the patient is put to sleep and given a muscular relaxant. A
small amount of electric current is then applied to the patient’s temples. This produces a
seizure.

ECT has proven highly beneficial in the treatment of severe depression. It is also
sometimes used with patients in depressive cycles of manic-depression. Although it
does not appear to be especially helpful with schizophrenia, it is occasionally given to
patients who present serious safety risks and do not respond to medication.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 227

eqs
ataractics — drugs
used in the
treatment of
mental disorders

=O

Recommendations are being made that this form of treatment continue to be available
for those who freely choose it, but that its use should be monitored by many special
safeguards. Side effects remain a major drawback. Memory loss often occurs. Other
side effects are: confusion (usually for a day or two), muscle aches, headaches, and
nausea. The elderly (especially depressed elderly women) now account for about half
of the people receiving shock therapy.

The most widely known type of psychosurgery is the prefrontal lobotomy. The nerve
fibres which join the hypothalamus with the prefrontal lobes are severed during this
operation. The lobotomy operation dulls a person’s emotional responses and may cause
a person to feel a loss of self-continuity (the feeling that they are the same person).
Since psychosurgery is irreversible and extreme, it is regarded as a drastic last measure.
It is not a recommended alternative nowadays.

Drugs are another type of physical intervention that may be used to correct underlying
chemical abnormalities. Ataractics is the term for drugs used in the treatment of mental
and emotional disorders. The application of drug treatments seem to alleviate some of
the guilt felt by both the patients and their families. The notion is that if the patient is
being treated for a chemical imbalance, then no one is really responsible for “driving
the person crazy’’. Thus the illness is no more shameful than diabetes, epilepsy, or high
blood pressure. The chemical composition of the mentally ill person’s brain does differ
significantly from that of a normal person. Missing chemicals may be identified and
therefore can be replaced. For example, one of the chemicals lacking in the brain of the
mentally ill is adenine. An injection of malononitrile will set in motion the production of
adenine.

228 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
psychotherapy —
using
psychological
methods to treat
behavioural
problems

group therapy —
the treatment of
behavioural
disorders with
talk-sessions and
support of the
group

— ee

Antipsychotics are a major treatment for the nonagitated, psychotic patients. Another
class of drugs widely used is benzodiazepines. The immediate goal of treatment of the
acutely agitated psychotic individual is to reduce the agitation, irritability, and/or
hostility to a level where the patient is not a physical danger to himself/herself or to
others. The alleviation of hallucinations and/or delusions causing agitated behaviour is
the ultimate goal. If the psychotic person is too upset to take oral medication, drugs may
be administered by intramuscular injection.

Presently, the importance of nutrition in maintaining or restoring mental health is
receiving wide attention. For example, megavitamin therapy has yielded some positive
results. A low carbohydrate, high protein diet is supplemented by large doses of
vitamins. It is not yet precisely understood how this therapy works, but findings have
been very encouraging.

All of the physical treatments mentioned treat the symptoms of mental illness, they do
not attempt to alter the causes except in the case of a chemical imbalance. But if the
treatment reduces or eliminates the symptoms, the patient can return to a more or less
normal life.

Psychological Treatment of Behavioural Disorders

Psychotherapy simply means treatment for behavioural disorders through
psychological means. We will review a variety of them now.

Group therapy offers an opportunity for persons with behavioural problems to use the
empathy and support of a small group to resolve their conflicts. The group leader may
either provide direct guidelines or be nondirective during therapy. Thus one therapist
can give support to several people at once. The group provides a setting for people to
explore their common problems in an open, uninhibited way with the realization that
others have experienced a similar hardship. For group therapy to be valuable,
participants must be capable of forming relationships with others and must be willing to
express their feelings to the group.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 229

(0) ca
abreaction —
expression of
repressed feelings
and emotional
pain through
verbal responses

introspective —
thoughtful
reflection about a
personal problem

ee <((0)

(0) ca
play therapy —
observing young
children in a play
situation to
determine reasons
for their
behavioural
problems

=e

When other therapies seem to fail, hypnotherapy may be used. In this approach,
hypnosis is teamed with other therapeutic procedures. One common use of
hypnotherapy is age regression which brings to light and examines events of early
childhood.

Psychoanalysis was a therapy used by Sigmund Freud to bring repressed memories
and hidden conflicts into conscious awareness (Lesson 1). It is still a popular method
used by a number of therapists many years later. One of the merits of psychoanalytic
therapy is abreaction or the expression of a repressed emotion. Another name for this
is catharsis or the discharge of emotional tensions by verbalizing one’s feelings. For
example, Sally always believed her older sister was favoured by her parents which
caused her to be bitter. Many years later she was able to talk about the pain she felt
when she was ignored by her parents.

The psychoanalytic technique is best suited to a certain type of individual. These
characteristics are important in a patient considering psychoanalysis: above average
intelligence, introspective, good verbal expression, not seriously disturbed, and
between 18 and 40 years of age. The patient must still have a fairly healthy personality
so they can understand what’s going on and help with their own cure. Often
psychoanalytic treatment extends over a period of several years.

Sleep deprivation has been studied for many years as a possible treatment for
depression. It involves keeping people up for nearly a day or longer than normal. What
sleep deprivation does is accelerate the response to antidepressant medication. Sleep
deprivation benefits may have something to do with body rhythms. It is not a helpful
therapy for people with milder forms of depression or those who are manic-depressive.

Play therapy for young children serves
several purposes. It is designed to help them
become aware of valid reasons for their
feelings and behaviours. For children who
have been emotionally abused or neglected,
another purpose is to provide them with an
opportunity to interact with caring, sensitive
adults. Free play is often used which means
various toys are provided and the children are
given the opportunity to play with them in
any way they choose. Doing art work and
then explaining what they have drawn and
why, is another way to gain valuable
information from young children. Through play therapy, children may reveal
information about themselves that they cannot talk about such as sexual abuse, sibling
rivalry, dysfunctional family lifestyles, and damaging discipline practices.

230 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
multiple
personality — the
person’s sense of
identity becomes
fragmented into
many separate
identities

ee

Treatment or Abandonment?

Sometimes therapy alone is not adequate for seriously ill mental patients. Institutionalized
care may be prescribed for those who present a threat to themselves or to those around them.
Families of these patients may not be able to provide the in-depth care and supervision they
require. There are critical shortages of acute-care beds in the psychiatric units of hospitals to
provide care for patients with severe problems.

Inrecent years the philosophy relating to the mentally ill has changed. At one time these people
were institutionalized indefinitely. The new change took the focus away from institutions and
emphasized having these patients released to the community to continue their recovery and
rehabilitation in a more “normal” situation, surrounded by friends and family. There is just one
problem, however. Many of these people have been abandoned by friends and family because
these care-givers have found the amount of support and supervision required for the mentally ill is
just too demanding in addition to their own commitments. Without follow-up support,
(community clinics to monitor ongoing treatment and medication) many former mental patients
neglect to take their medication and check-in for necessary medical appointments. After that
happens, they usually begin experiencing the same symptoms that sent them to a mental institution
in the first place. As their mental illness becomes more pronounced, these people often find
themselves wandering the streets and seeking shelter where ever they can as homeless people.
Others end up in the criminal justice system for crimes that have been committed when what they
really need is psychiatric care. Institutional care can be reduced but before that happens, the
money must be spent to make the patients ready for the community, and the community ready for
the patients.

Multiple Personalities

Multiple personality is now formally known as Dissociative Identity Disorders (DID). For
this section we will still refer to it as multiple personality because that label gives a more
accurate understanding of the behavioural problem. At one time it was surrounded by
mystery and thought to be a very rare phenomenon. Research has shown that it is much
more common than it was believed to be. There are estimates that up to 1% of the
population may be affected in some way which would mean it is as much of a problem as
schizophrenia and depression.

Multiple personality (MPD) is a mental process which produces a lack of connection or
continuity in a person’s thoughts, memories, feeling, actions, and most importantly in their
sense of identity. During the period of time when a person is in that state, connections are not
made between certain key information as it normally would be. What would cause such a
dramatic upheaval to occur in a person’s thought patterns? When faced with overwhelming
traumatic situations from which there is no physical escape, a child may resort to “going
away” in his or her head. Most people do that to a lesser degree like daydreaming or getting
lost in a book or movie, all of which involve losing touch with conscious awareness of one’s
immediate surroundings. This ability is typically used by children as an extremely
effective defense against acute physical and emotional pain or anxious anticipation of
that pain. This is a creative survival technique allowing the child to sever memories of
the pain and pretend the trauma had not occurred. Because the dissociative escape is so

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 231

effective, children become practised at doing it and may automatically use this whenever
they feel threatened or anxious. It may occur in early childhood as a response to extreme,
repeated physical, sexual and/or emotional abuse especially when children are at a
sensitive developmental stage usually before age nine. Because this process can
produce changes in memory, people who frequently dissociate often find their sense of
personal history and identity are affected.

G Let’s begin by studying a person who actually had a multiple personality disorder, (Y
Billy Milligan. He was the first person in US history to be found not guilty of major
crimes by reason of insanity because he possessed multiple personalities. The crime
he was on trial for was the kidnap and rape of three women. After in-depth
interviews and psychological assessment, it was determined that he had 24 distinct
personalities. The childhood history of Billy Milligan revealed that his mother and
her children (including Billy) were subjected to physical abuse including sadistic
sexual abuse. His stepfather had often threatened him with silence by stating he

\ vue murder Billy, bury him, and tell everyone that he had run away. yy

A person diagnosed with MPD has within them two or more entities, or personality
states, each with its own independent way of relating, perceiving, thinking and
remembering about themselves and their lives. It is important to keep in mind that
although these alternate personality states may appear to be very different, they are all
manifestations of a single person.

Let’s return to Billy’s story.

G Each one of Billy’s personalities was quite unique and each one had a different »\
name. Some were male, some were female. The ages of his many personalities
varied from young children to people in their teens and early twenties. Some of
the personalities had special talents that the others did not possess such as
unique abilities in art work. Some of them had unique speech patterns; some of
them spoke with accents. Some of the personalities were considered good or
innocent; others were evil and undesirable. Some personalities had habits that
the others didn’t (like smoking), and some had physical disabilities that belong
to them alone (dyslexia). Many of the personalities were aware of some of the
other existing personalities but not all of them. Some of Billy’s personalities had
very high IQs (130) and some had unusually low IQs (75). Billy described the
times when he was being replaced by another personality from within like being on a
stage, and when it is not your turn to be the personality who has control, you
relinquish the spotlight and move to the wings of the stage in the darkness.
Integration of all personalities into the “basic” personality is the ultimate goal of
therapy for multiple personality. But some cases of multiple personality are too

ome to be resolved. y)

232 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=
fusion —
integrating or
bringing together
all parts of the
personality

ee <<<((0)))>

What are some of the general symptoms of multiple personality? People affected may
experience the following: depression, mood swings, suicidal tendencies, sleep disorders,
panic attacks, phobias, alcohol and drug abuse, compulsions and rituals, psychotic-like
symptoms, and eating disorders. They can also experience amnesias, time loss, trances, and
out-of-body experiences. Some may have a tendency toward self-persecution, even
violence.

Treatment of multiple personalities holds a lot of hope, although it should be mentioned that
patients often spend years living with misdiagnoses. That occurs because the symptoms are
very similar to those of many other psychiatric conditions. Dissociative disorders are highly
responsive to individual psychotherapy. Treatment is long-term, intensive, and invariably
painful because it involves remembering and reclaiming the dissociated traumatic
experiences. The objective of therapy is to integrate or fuse together the whole personality
that has been fractured or fragmented into many separate compartments from the core
personality which creates multiple personalities in the first place. 'usion involves the
process of bringing all aspects of the person’s self together by communicating and
remembering what each part does in order to get rid of the amnesia. Then the therapist
works toward getting all the pieces of the personality to work together so the person can
return to good mental health.

Summary

This lesson focused on a number of very serious personality disturbances. Each one has
different causes, symptoms, and treatments.

To summarize:

* Psychosis is a serious state of mental disruption or abnormality. A person with
psychosis may be withdrawn and have confused ideas about reality.

¢ There is a stigma attached to psychotic behaviour, which means that it is
viewed as being shameful or disgraceful.

* When panic attacks occur, a person feels such intense anxiety that they fear
they may be having a heart attack.

¢ People with paranoia are insecure individuals who have an arrogant, superior
attitude and a distorted, suspicious view of their relationships with others
called delusions.

¢ Manic-depressive disorders are sometimes referred to as bipolar depression
because they involve extreme mood changes from being depressed to being
extremely elated.

¢ Schizophrenia is one of the more serious and common mental illnesses. There
is a separation between reality and appropriate responses and emotions.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 233

* Schizophrenics may hear voices in their heads or lose sense of who
they are. There is evidence to indicate that a serious chemical
imbalance may be one of the main factors.

¢ People who are involved with various forms of self-injurious behaviours
are often those who have an abusive past. They are turning their anger
inward to hurt themselves as a cry for help.

* Alcohol psychosis may develop when individual’s have a serious and
prolonged drinking problem.

¢ Alzheimer’s Disease is caused by degeneration of the brain cells affecting
memory, judgment, communication skills, and physical coordination.

¢ The different kinds of psychosis may be treated in a number of different
ways.

¢ The eclectic approach involves taking the best parts of a number of
different theories to build one theory.

* Electroconvulsive shock therapy is one form of treatment that has many
strong supporters, and many adversaries.

¢ Drug therapy with a number of different antipsychotic drugs has proven to
be successful in many cases.

* Play therapy can be used for some types of behavioural disorders
affecting young children.

¢ Psychoanalysis utilizes the theories of Sigmund Freud and studies
psychosis by examining childhood experiences.

* Multiple personalities is a serious type of psychosis that occurs when
childhood traumas may cause a person to dissociate or fragment their
identities.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 7 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

234 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
