SECTION THREE

Studying Behaviour

Lesson 1: Roles and Group Influence

Overview

In the first part of this lesson you will examine what roles are and how they influence
our behaviour. Since human beings are social animals, the influence of others is a major
focus of the later part of this lesson. Groups of one kind or another play a tremendous part
in shaping our attitudes, our thoughts, and ultimately our behaviour.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 93

Lesson | will focus on these topics:

¢ What isa Role?

* HowDo Roles Differ in Nature?

* HowAre Roles Learned?

¢ What is Androgyny?

¢ What Causes Role Conflicts?

* How Role Changes Lead to Improvements

* Rites of Passage and Birth Order

¢ How Important is the Group?

* Our Membership in the Family

¢ Peer Groups and Their Influence

* Group Classification

* Group Decisions and Influences

° Leadership

¢ Small Group Dynamics —Communication and Unity
* Negative Side of Groups

¢ Being Outside the Group — Dealing with Bullies, Unemployment
* Positive Side of Groups

¢ Winning With People

What is a Role?

This famous quotation should be familiar to you:

“All the world’s a stage
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts.”

94 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=e
role — the
behaviour pattern
one assumes, or
the character one
plays
—=—iO

Since the first part of your lesson focuses on the topic of roles, it is important to begin
with a clear understanding of the meaning of the term role. It may be defined as “a part,
a character, or a function which is taken or assumed by anyone”. Therefore a role
involves action, behaviour, and activities.

Have you ever taken an objective look at some of your actions and felt that you were really
“performing” or acting out a part? For example, did you get carried away with your feelings
of anger and punch the wall just like one of the tough guys on a TV show? In a romantic
situation, did you use more loving phrases than you had intended as your partner kept telling
you what a great person you were? When roles are brand new to us, we may imitate the
way someone else has handled that role until we understand all the ins and outs of the role
and feel completely comfortable with it.

Another observation that can be made about roles is that they are assumed. We may
take up a new role, or decide we want to cast aside a role. We can put on and take off
some roles like an article of clothing. Clothing is still very real and recognizable even
though a person is not wearing the garment. Roles have a life of their own too, even
when someone is not performing the role at that particular moment. For example, the
members of the town council decide they need someone to play the role of fire chief
because the last one retired from that position two weeks ago. Another example: you
might have had the role of the neighbourhood prankster for a few years. Lately, you
have settled down and become more “refined,” but you can always revert to the role of
neighbourhood joker whenever you choose.

Just as your wardrobe will have many different kinds of clothes for you to wear, so a
person may put on and take off many different kinds of roles. In fact, comparing clothes
to roles is a good one because the clothes we wear will have a definite impact on our
behaviour and therefore on our roles. For example, what you wear to a Saturday night
party is quite different from what you might wear to church. Your roles in the two
situations are quite different. That’s why attending a social function inappropriately
dressed can cause everyone to feel uncomfortable; it is more than just having the wrong
clothing—it also means you have incorrectly defined your role for that occasion. A
person might have many different roles during his/her lifetime.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 95

eqn
deviant —a
person who
displays
inappropriate
behaviour

—aeO

=
interdependent —
the connections
people have with
each other

a

When choosing a role, a person doesn’t have the option of adding and deleting from the
role as they choose. One accepts the role as a package deal. Certain restrictions, benefits
and responsibilities come with any role that a person must be willing to assume. For
example, you cannot decide to be a good friend to someone but prefer not to lend a hand to
the person or offer them any emotional support in the tough times. Roles are sets of
expectations that are prescribed for a person. If a person steps outside of the established
tules regarding that role, they risk the possibility of being labelled deviant. A deviant is
someone who displays inappropriate behaviour. Sometimes deviant behaviour is not proper
(but harmless) like purposely wearing a T-shirt with a nasty message to your graduation
ceremonies. Sometimes deviant behaviour can be harmful, immoral, illegal and vicious. For
example, when the referee at one international soccer match called a bad game, he was shot
to death by a fanatical fan. Another example of a milder form of deviance: you are a parent
to a young child; that is an extremely, important role. You decide you don ‘t want to give
guidance and direction to the child but would prefer to be “best friends” instead of acting
like a parent.

Roles are interdependent behaviour patterns. Roles exist in an interlocking system or
network. You have one role that must intermesh with several other roles in order that
things will go smoothly. Some deviations in roles are critical because they can upset the
whole system and throw it into chaos. For example, if you are a cashier at a department
store, that is one of your roles. Someone else plays the role of a customer and expects
you to record their purchase, take their money or credit card, and package the item. If
you do not provide service to the customer (unless the reason is a legitimate one), your
boss will want to know why you are jeopardizing the system. Another example: You
are a teenage son or daughter—certain chores are assigned to you. Your parents have
roles as well that are part of the network of family obligations.

96 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

===
reciprocal — two
components
operate with a
balance of give
and take

Oe

Every social relationship is defined by being a set or a pair of roles. Reciprocity is the
key word when studying the obligations of a relationship. Roles operate on a delicate
balance of inputs and outputs. Cooperation is the key. What is one partner’s obligations
is the other person’s right. Every member of a system is assigned certain tasks. At the
same time the person is entitled to receive services from others in return for the
contributions the person has made. In this way, relationships have a personal value in
satisfying one’s own goals. For example, as a student, you expect your assignments to be
read by the teacher and that you will receive useful feedback. The reciprocal role of your
teacher involves the expectation that you will remain on topic when answering questions and
that you will phrase your ideas in a readable form.

Some roles are well defined. These roles are usually related to a specific occupation and
have a “job description” detailing what is expected of the person. The role of a friend,
or a daughter, or a sports fan are more vague roles. They are open to a wide range of
interpretations as to what is appropriate or expected. The obligations which are a part of
these roles are also less definite. Some misinterpreted roles may be harmless, even
humourous; at other times role alterations can be deviant in nature.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 97

How Do Roles Differ In Nature?

There are four basic criteria involved in the description of roles. Sex, age, kinship and
common residence are factors which are important in defining many of our roles in life.

Roles: Sex

All human societies follow certain rules when it comes to assigning tasks that are
appropriate for each of the sexes. The rules for “correct” sexual roles vary from one
society to the next.

In modern, industrial societies, the sexual division of labour for everyday household
duties varies from family to family. In some households, both spouses share duties
interchangeably. In other cases, the male does outside work and the female does inside
chores. In peasant or tribal societies where the household has the added burden of
producing goods for market, then the division of labour by sex is usually dictated by a
list of do’s and don’t’s.

Let’s visit a husband and wife in a primitive Bushman society to see how they organize
their daily activities. Their extremely harsh environment makes it imperative that each
person strictly follow his or her role obligations. To deviate from their organized
division of labour could put their survival in jeopardy.

Wife's Duties Husband's Duties
* cares for the children * collects roots and fruits
¢ builds the family shelter ¢ hunts animals
* prepares food ¢ makes clothing from skins
¢ collects wood and water * makes weapons, fire sticks
¢ keeps the fire burning ¢ starts the fire
¢ keeps the camp clean ¢ makes large wooden containers
¢ makes ornaments ¢ twists rope

You can observe how these activities are interdependent and reciprocal. Each person
has a clear understanding of what duties are expected of each one according to sex.

There is cultural variation in the practice of assigning roles to men and women. Here are

some interesting examples illustrating cultural variation in the tasks assigned to men and
women.

98 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

— =
status — position
of authority and
respect

=O

Hopi Indians: Women do house building and look after house repairs. Men spin
and weave cloth to make clothing for both men and women.

Navaho Indians: Men weave ceremonial garments. Women do the everyday spinning

and weaving.

Zulu Tribe: Women work in the fields, planting and harvesting the grain. Men
look after the cattle.

Nuer Tribe: Men herd the cattle. Women are the only ones who are allowed to
milk the cattle.

These examples indicate that many roles that men and women are assigned cannot be
explained in terms of differences in the physical characteristics of the sexes. Many roles
are assigned arbitrarily to each sex by their culture. That means there is no clear
reasons for the choices that are made; the roles seem to be sorted in a random way. In
some cultures strong superstitions enforce the decisions about who is allowed to do
what. But before we pass judgment on these people for being narrow-minded, are we
really any different when we find it hard to picture a woman dentist?

Nevertheless, in our society we are gradually breaking away from the strict division of
roles—one for men and one for women. Women seem more flexible about breaking old
barriers and moving into areas of work that were once considered for “men only”. Why
do you think men are more reluctant to assume new tasks that were once viewed as
“women’s work”? To answer that question we have to understand the concept of
status. Status refers to one’s position of importance.

The status of men has always been higher
than the status of women. Women have
never been given dominance over men
(except for rare cases where an individual
woman has become ruler for unusual
reasons). How a society determines the
status of the sexes remains a mystery. Men’s
higher status is not based on the fact that
they make a more significant contribution to
survival because in many cases that is
clearly the women’s role. In some societies
the status of the two sexes approaches
equality; other times the men remain
dominant.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 99

Two universal rules apply to all cultures. In all societies the rearing of infants is the
speciality of women. In all societies the primary police or military force which is used
to preserve order is provided by men who are specially trained to use weapons. Outside
of these two principles, there are a number of different rules and variations when it
comes to roles regarding the sexes.

Roles: Age

Age is a significant factor when determining the status of roles. The child’s role
responsibilities gradually increase with age until the person finally reaches adult status.
Then, slowly the status of one’s role declines as old age approaches and the elderly lose
power and prestige in the society. For example, some seniors complain that people
don’t appreciate the hardships and contributions seniors have made to the progress of
our society.

Transitions from one age category to another aren’t very smooth or clear at times. Many
teenagers complain that some days they are treated like children by their parents, and
other times they are expected to act as adults. For example, a sixteen year old girl feels
bitter about the fact that she is expected to assume full adult responsibilities in preparing
supper alone. Yet when she goes out with her friends, her parents try to impose a

10:00 p.m. curfew as if she were a young child.

The seniors in our society are also disturbed by their status which relates to the age
factor. One day they are an active, productive member of the work-force. Then, they
reach retirement age and are pushed to the sidelines. Being old is not considered a
glamorous or a significant role. In primitive societies the elderly are made to feel
special. They are treated as intellectuals and have a definite place in decision-making
matters.

Primitive cultures help their people make the
transition from one role to the next based on the age
factor by having distinct age/responsibility
designations. Our modern conveniences blur the
lines clarifying when a child attains the full status of
adulthood. For example, a seventeen year old has
driving privileges but yet this young person still lives
at home under the watchful eye of mom and dad. An
elderly person exercises, eats well, has the benefit of
modern medicines as well as cosmetics and hair
dyes. Therefore grandma might look and feel like a
fifty year old when she is really closer to seventy-
five. A very interesting example of modern
procedures that confuses the age roles is the fact
that modern medicine has helped a few women who
are in their fifties and early sixties give birth to
children.

100 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

extended kinship
— all the relatives
outside the circle
of the immediate
family

nuclear family —
mother, father,
and children

Oe

Roles: Kinship and Common Residence

In recent years, kinship roles have undergone a dramatic change. A person’s kin are people
who are related to the person by birth, through family lines. In pioneer times, the extended
kinship group was very common consisting of parents, children, grandparents, aunts,
uncles and cousins. However, in our modern society, people are very mobile and the kin
group is no longer as prominent as it had once been. The nuclear family consisting of
parents and children is a more streamlined unit. Often the nuclear family lives far away from
any relatives. Think of an important decision you or your family have made in the past six
months. A nuclear family makes its own decisions with no input from outside sources unless
the family seeks advice from friends, counsellors, or professional consultants. In pioneer
times, grandparents, aunts and uncles would all voice an opinion.

Before you decide that it is so much better to enjoy independence through the nuclear
family, remember that many years ago if someone was sick or experiencing financial
distress, all the relatives were there to offer support. Without the extended kin, we often
call upon close friends to act as kin. Some of the help given by the extended kin must
now come from social programs sponsored by the government, the church, or the
community.

In troubled financial times, grandparents may find grown sons and daughters are
moving back home temporarily because they are unable to live independently.
Sometimes grandparents are asked to raise grandchildren which puts them in the role of
being parents once again.

Family or kinship roles have taken some very interesting twists and turns. New
relationship patterns are evolving all the time.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 101

Es

ascribed role — a
position given
automatically at
birth
—=O __

=e
achieved role —a
position give
the basis of merit
and competence

ee

on

— =
socialization —
the process of
learning the
appropriate
values and
behaviours of the
society

Oe

102

Section Three: Studying Behaviour

How Are Roles Learned?

One of the first things that must be clarified is that not all
roles are learned. Some roles are ascribed. An ascribed
role is one that is given to someone automatically, with no
effort on the person’s part. For example, Queen
Elizabeth II plays the role of queen because it was
conferred upon by inheritance.

Another example: you are automatically a son ora
daughter to your parents. You do not have to learn the
role or practise it; you receive that role the moment
you are born.

Other roles are classified as achieved roles. They are acquired by the person through hard
work, ambition and merit. For example, the role a Prime Minister or President is an
achieved one.

In summary, roles can be sorted into two categories. Ascribed roles are those which people
are given automatically. Achieved roles must be attained through competition and individual
effort. In a more progressive society, achieved status is more important. Why is this true?
Any society needs bright and talented people in key positions of leadership in order to surge
ahead. When a society is allowed to choose the most capable people instead of giving
someone the position based on inheritance, then the society is in the best position to make
positive choices for its future success.

So our achieved roles are the ones that are learned. But the question is: How are they
learned? Socialization during childhood acquaints us with our roles. This process refers
to the notion that we develop clear ideas of what is appropriate behaviour and what
isn’t accepted. We begin by learning how our families expect us to behave, and later
understand the expectations of our society as a whole. Ideas about proper behaviour
become internalized or engrained within the person to the point that we automatically
accept these rules as being the truth.

Parents and family are an important source of knowledge about roles. Playmates, the
education system, the church, and the mass media are some of the other significant
contacts that will define roles and help the individual learn those roles. The process of
identifying and imitating roles is simple and straight forward. A role is shown in a
favourable way. If the appeal is great enough, the role will be imitated. People are fairly
impressionable when it comes to accepting new roles. For example, a little girl sees her
mother hold and cuddle the baby and provide for its care. She may copy this behaviour
with her doll. Later she will extend this role by caring for younger siblings.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

(0) aaa
gender identity —
the person
establishes if they
are male or
female

ae

One of the most important tasks we learn regarding our roles in life is gender identity.
Do we label ourselves as being male or female? Will we look at life from the
perspective of a female or a male? The child begins with self-labelling, that is
understanding his or her own sex label by three years of age. Clothing and hair styles
(as well as noticing a loose cluster of physical characteristics) are the main criteria the
child uses in determining the gender identity of others. This task may seem very simple
but with unisex hair and clothing styles, the young child has to make some fine
distinctions. The development of a stable gender identification is usually completed by
the age of five. Gender identity is distinctive in being the most stable and unchanging of
all social identities. It is a very important developmental task which directs and modifies
all of the person’s other activities throughout life.

We have often used the terms maleness-femaleness and masculinity-femininity. Is there
a difference between them? The answer is a definite “yes”. Maleness and femaleness
are based on biological makeup of the body. Physical sexual characteristics
(reproductive organs) are different and hormonal makeup is different. Masculinity and
femininity are determined by our cultural perspective. Each culture has its own notion
of what is masculine and what is feminine behaviour. Because masculinity and
femininity are not determined genetically, they can be
expressed in a wide variety of ways.

Our definitions of masculinity and femininity are derived
directly from the roles and duties that are assigned to
each sex during parenthood. We assume everyone will
ultimately become a father or a mother. However,
nowadays approximately 50% of all married couples do
not become parents. In the past, the biological nature of
our reproductive functions determined the division of
labour for the sexes. Males were dominant, more
mobile, and protective. Females were passive, sedentary,
and nurturant. Does the biologically determined division
of labour between the sexes still apply as strongly as before?

In our society, what constitutes masculine and feminine behaviour? Boys were raised to
pattern themselves after these traits: physical aggression, dominance, competence at
athletics, achievement, competitiveness, and independence. The traits favoured for girls
included: dependence, passivity, inhibition of physical aggression, competence at
language skills, politeness, social poise, and neatness. How will these perceptions of
each sex have an impact on roles? From these lists it may be concluded that our society
tends to prescribe a role for women that entails less competence and maturity than the
role prescribed for men.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 103

=a
generation gap —
having different

values, ideas and
perspectives than
people who are

older or younger

a <<((0)

Practically all psychological and aptitudinal differences reported between the sexes can
be explained by cultural factors rather than inborn differences. Therefore, males are
raised to emulate male-valued traits and are rewarded for such behaviours. Females are
conditioned to favour female-valued traits. Can you think of some examples where
these prescribed rules are too restrictive? What happens to the person who follows his
or her own interests despite these rules?

What Causes Role Conflicts?

There are two basic reasons for role conflicts. One is that roles are misunderstood. During
the socialization process, the person is not properly shown the duties and responsibilities of
the role. Or, people view the role but chose to interpret it differently.

A more common reason for role conflicts is that society changes and so do our roles. The
person does not remain up-to-date with what is considered appropriate behaviour.
Nowadays children and young adults are allowed more freedom and given more
opportunities. Those facts can raise the potential for role conflicts.

Constant change and rapid progress have contributed to
the generation gap. The basis of the generation gap is
differences in values and perspectives which leads to
difficulty in communicating between different age levels.
The end result is lack of understanding which goes both
ways. Our permissive society results in more lax ideas of
discipline. This in turn causes children and young
people to be more questioning of authority. Can you
think of some examples of how these changes lead to
more role conflicts within the family?

During the course of their upbringing, children are being exposed to many different

institutions. When many different institutions share parenting responsibilities, a conflict of
standards is inevitable. For example, the school and the home may be at odds with each
other over the proper handling of the child. The child then believes adult standards about
roles are ambiguous.

The mass media is another source of role conflict between parent, child and society.
The mass media may portray certain lifestyles in a favourable light which can lead to
strong disagreement from the parents.

104 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Let’s briefly examine some of the role conflicts which may occur during dating and
courtship.

Here are some comments from young women.

Comment One: It was embarrassing for me when I was academically superior to my
boyfriend. Consequently, we never discussed school marks, and
sometimes I would ask him to explain the math assignment even
though I knew how to do it.

Comment Two: My mother told me to lay off the brains on dates if I liked my date
enough for him to become a “‘steady”.

Comment Three: _—_ Boys fear girls who make decisions so I always let my boyfriend
choose a movie or a restaurant although I sometimes feel I could
make a better choice.

Comment Four: My field was scuba diving; my boyfriend was a health food nut. I
frequently steered the conversation toward “his” topic of health
foods to boost his ego and build his sense of security.

How do you react to such remarks? If you are a girl or woman, have you ever been
involved with this game? Do you believe it is wrong or can you justify it? If you are a
boy or a man, do you feel threatened by a member of the opposite sex who is more
capable than you in certain areas? Or are you more angry at a girl for creating a lie
about her true talents? If dating and courtship are based on staged behaviour, are role
conflicts inevitable when the permanent marriage union is established?

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 105

(0) aaa
androgyny —
combining both
male and female
traits and
capabilities

ee <<<((0)>

What Is An Androgyny?

Earlier we learned that our gender identity is the foundation of our perspective on life. We
also learned that sex roles are sorted into two piles—one for men and one for women. Is it
possible to have a less rigid attitude toward our sex roles?

The term androgyny is a combination of andro-male and gyne-female. It removes the
stereotypes we have for each sex and allows people the opportunity to combine the best
traits of both men and women. Traditional concepts of masculinity and femininity put
limitations on a person’s behaviour and how they can express themselves.

In our society an adult must be independent, assertive and self reliant. However,
traditional femininity frowns on women behaving in such a way. In addition, an adult
must be sensitive, caring, and attuned to emotional needs. Traditional masculinity keeps
men away from expressing these personal needs. Androgyny combines the best of both
abilities. It allows adults to be independent yet sensitive; they can be assertive yet open
to the wishes of others; in other words, they can be both masculine and feminine.
Androgyny facilitates a superior standard of psychological health for the sexes. It
unburdens people from sets of narrow views and narrow behaviours. Androgyny
expands the horizons of both men and women. It permits people to cope effectively
with a wide range of situations.

How does androgyny translate into actual role behaviours or activities? For example,
androgyny means a man can arrange a business deal on his own, vacuum the family
room, cuddle his children and read them bedtime stories, and do the family laundry. For
example, androgyny means a woman can change the oil in her car, bake a casserole for
someone who has been ill, and mow the lawn. Since many of the activities of men and
women now overlap because of androgyny, it should give both sexes a better
understanding and appreciation of each other.

106 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

How Can Role Changes Lead To Improvements?

Nowadays it is very common to find women employed outside the home. Men are assuming
more household chores than they did in the past. How eager are both sexes to take on
new duties? On the average, men do not want to change as much as women do. Since
men generally have higher status roles, they gain little by the change and they do not
see the need for change as readily.

Today more women are pursuing high
status careers, but few men are clamouring
for the position of full time homemaker.
Because of our socialization, our first
reaction to the male homemaker will likely
be negative. However, some men are terrific
cooks, great domestic planners, and are very
patient and understanding with children.

Some women make superb business
administrators. Modern companies and
businesses must be more people-friendly. The
Female Advantage means that feminine
qualities bring valuable perspectives to the
management of these businesses. The old
system focused on hierarchical structures
which were goal-oriented and power based
following the masculine view. Women often
manage people in a collegial way. They
gain ideas through consensus which means
power is shared by getting good opinions from all employees.

In addition, women employees may set a positive example for men on how to integrate
work and family. Women’s increasing presence in the business field may encourage such
positive changes as: more job-sharing, more flexible work hours, and parental leave of
absence for both men and women. Rather than precipitating role conflicts, the working
mother can be a potential catalyst for a deeper understanding of the roles of husband and
wife through shared obligations.

When people become too comfortable, they may begin to stagnate and turn their backs on
change. Role conflicts can arise because people are not willing or not able to change when
the time is right to do so. The obstacles interfering with change are: outdated values, lack of
ability to adjust, and uncorrected mistakes which have been passed on by previous
generations. When conflict leads to change, people are motivated to examine their roles
more carefully and seek ways of bringing about change for the sake of growth.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 107

=
rites of passage —
attaining the
status of full
membership after
enduring an
initiation
procedure

=e

Role conflicts can produce some useful changes. They may cause us to examine our
priorities and our values. They may make us more aware of injustices. The result might
be a breakdown of restricted and outdated habits that are not allowing people to
progress and find their real areas of growth and achievement.

Rites of Passage

The term rites of passage refers to an initiation or a “test” that a person must pass to gain
membership and acceptance in a new role. The basic idea behind such a concept is that
roles are very special. You must prove yourself worthy to meet the obligations of the role
before you are allowed to accept it. It also gives people a stronger sense of belonging to the
group if membership is not automatically granted but rather you must endure some hardship
to reach that goal.

Some primitive tribes have a set initiation rite that we may view as being barbaric.
Young men or young women must endure physical pain and sometimes mental or
psychological anguish to prove that they will be worthy adult members of the tribe.
Once the initiation is over, they are accepted by everyone as full adults, with all the
privileges of that position.

In our society, we have many turning points in our lives where we may be subjected to
a similar experience. Often when students enter high school, they may have to endure
various froshing activities. Senior students may demand the freshman students must do
some embarrassing or humiliating act to emphasize they are just rookies in the system
and must earn respect before they become full-fledged members. Sometimes these
activities are fun and harmless; at other times they may become hazing which means
serious bullying and intimidation.

Commonly when people want to join a new club, there is some form of initiation or
welcome as well. Rites of passage give us a sense of achievement and a sense of
belonging to the group, but they should not become vicious or physically dangerous.

108 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Birth Order

The family unit is very important for socialization which teaches us the roles we need to
live successfully in society. Each family is unique for a number of reasons. One reason
is the number of children in each family and the arrangement of the boy-girl pattern as
well as age gaps between children. Your place in the family has a great impact on who
you are.

Some people believe that each position in the family produces a child with a common
pattern of characteristics.

First Born: They are high achievers. They like to do well both academically and
athletically. They are responsible and dominant. Parents have very
high expectations for these children which pushes them to do well at
all tasks. Therefore they are conforming and adult-oriented.

Middle Children: These children are sometimes labelled the forgotten children
because they don’t have the special recognition of the first or last
born. They are peacekeepers or mediators in the family because
they see problems from both the perspective of oldest and
youngest. They are outgoing, friendly, and social.

Last Born: They are often cute, charming and special. They can be
disorganized and don’t like the responsibility of making
decisions. They have developed good social skills. They seek
more friendships outside the family as older siblings become
independent and leave home.

Only Children: They will have many characteristics of first-borns, but do not
have patience.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 109

The boy-girl pattern of siblings have an influence on their behaviour. If the oldest child
is a girl, followed by three brothers, the oldest boy who is really a middle child may
exhibit the characteristics of an oldest child since he will be the leader of his two
younger brothers.

A gap between the siblings of 5 years or more is considered significant. Consider a family
that has two children, followed by a break of 8 years and then has two more children. The
oldest child of the second group of children may act as the oldest child. By the same token
the youngest child of the first set of children may act as the youngest since they have been
the “baby of the family” for a long stretch of 8 years.

These theories about birth order, family status, and roles give us some interesting ideas
for speculation!

110 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

How Important Is The Group?

We assume that people value groups whether it be the family, friendships, clubs, the
community, or our society as a whole. But let’s begin by questioning whether this is a valid
assumption.

Just how important is group contact for human beings? Suppose an individual commits a
serious crime not accepted or tolerated by society. Punishment means removal from society
by incarceration. In prison further misbehaviour follows. What, then, is the ultimate form of
punishment? Solitary confinement. Depriving people of contact with other human beings
through isolation or shunning is considered a very serious type of reprimand.

It is important to study the special control a group exerts over individual behaviour. Groups
are assumed to have characteristics different from merely the sum of the collective
characteristics of their individual members. Group behaviour is unique. In some respects a
small group is like a miniature replica of the larger society.

Social motives are very important in controlling individual behaviour. There are no limits to
what length some people will go in order to gain social approval including killing someone,
or enduring humiliation, pain, or death. Many of our highly valued activities are undertaken,
not for their own sake, but as instrumental steps in getting other people to notice,
appreciate, help, love, or honour us.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour i111

Our Membership In The Family

The process by which people learn to live in harmony with themselves, with others and with
their culture is called socialization. The family is the first and the most important group
involved in the process of socialization. Perhaps the most essential aspect of socialization is
the development of a conscience—the ability to distinguish between right and wrong. The
conscience is the basic tool people require for positive interactions with others in group
situations.

Nl

The formation of the conscience is part of our moral development. The home is a major
contributor. Along with a conscience, the family teaches its members important lessons
about having concern for the welfare of others and respecting the rights of others. The family
has the first, the most basic, and the greatest influence on the socialization of a child.

112 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

(0) aaa
peer — someone of
the same rank or
standing

—eO

== —
reference group —
a group of people
who have similar
beliefs and values

a <<<((0))

Lesson Three: Peer Groups and Their Influence

A peer is a person of the same rank or
standing and is often of the same age. A
peer is an equal. A common concern of
parents is the influence of peers on their
child’s actions and values. Many parent-
child arguments centre around the child’s
choice of friends. Parents become
particularly anxious if they feel their child is
giving up parental standards and adopting
peer standards instead.

We usually compare ourselves to others
who are similar to us in their beliefs and
values. These persons are said to be our
reference group. For example, your
reference group may be your classmates or
your athletic teammates. Sometimes we use
as reference groups those groups in which
we actually have membership. Sometimes
we use groups in which we wish we
belonged. How much of our behaviour is
influenced by the groups depends on how
important it is to us to identify with our
reference group or maintain membership.
We are attracted to people who are
reflections of ourselves or who represent
what we would like to be.

Young people find security in relationships with others their own age. With the support of the
peer group, the individual can move from parental control to more self control. The peer
group assists the individual in obtaining personal evaluation that is objective without family
biases. Within the peer group, the individual is compared to friends of equal ability not to
brothers and sisters. Peers provide the individual with a social setting in which social
behaviour can develop. The individual can feel secure in discussing a variety of sensitive
topics with peers. They discover friends may have similar feelings and thus feel less guilty
and awkward about their own feelings.

Identifying with a group allows the individual to share in whatever prestige and power the
group possesses. Some persons are so lacking in self-confidence that even the slightest
approval or disapproval from others will get them to act in a particular way. The group has a
tremendous influence.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 113

=a
crowd —a
flexible
gathering of
people with
common goals
and purposes

=e

Group Classification

Groups can be classified in a number of ways depending on the purpose and perspective of
the group. Let’s look at a number of factors.

The Crowd

During mid-adolescence the crowd becomes the most important avenue of contact. The
crowd is a group of people of homogeneous or similar age grouping. Members of both
sexes are represented. The crowd has a strong feeling of togetherness and a sense of
community spirit among its members. Friendships are flexible among crowd members with
the length of friendship varying from person to person. The crowd leader is regarded as a
model or reference person for all crowd members. The crowd is a loose collection of
individuals who come together to engage in mutually beneficial activities. The crowd is not
bound by strong group pressures or to rigid norms. The crowd is a temporary gathering of
people responding to a common stimulus or focus and possibly engaging in some form of
collective behaviour. For example, if a group of students gather in the gym during noon
hours to make stage settings for the spring play, they may be classified as a crowd. Another
example: the students of Central High School meeting in the gym for a general assembly
would be considered a crowd.

114 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

— =
clique — a group
structured around
class lines with
strict control over
its members

tO

==
in group — the
group to which a
person belongs

out group — the
people outside of
one ’s group

— Oe

The Clique

The clique is a group of people with special, distinguishing features. The clique is usually
quite small in numbers. The clique is structured around class lines. The higher the class, the
more strict are the controls surrounding admission to the clique. The clique is more cohesive
than the crowd, and its profile is more clearly defined. The clique meets some important
goals for its members. The clique may aid the young person in developing an acceptable sex
role in the society. The clique is a means whereby the members establish significant social
relationships in the society. Membership in the clique gives the individual status and a sense
of worth. For example, a clique would be a group of students who form a Music
Appreciation Club. The clique’s power and authority would be strengthened if it enforced
the rules that only people who regularly attended the symphony or opera could join.
Another example: you work in a large office—a small group of people in your department
form a close-knit group that sticks together for work and social functions.

In Groups and Out Groups

In general, a person identifies with and builds strong links to their in group. Anyone outside
those boundaries is known as the out group. Obviously in groups and out groups are
different for every individual. Under some circumstances the boundaries of the in and out
group will be strictly guarded to block the entry of new members. If conflict or competition
arises between various in groups, then rigid controls will also be enforced. Here is an
interesting illustration that could apply to any group of people. For example, students collect
ina variety of groups during the noon hour. Students move from one group to another to
engage in casual conversation. Then one day the school administration advertises a poster
competition for a special prize. Students may work on the project in groups during the noon
hour At that point, in and out groups will likely become established and strictly enforced.
Each group of students won’t want anyone else to invade their boundaries and steal their
ideas. In group members will work together on the poster; out group members will be
excluded.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 115

===
inclusive group —
group’s aim is to
expand
membership and
to include more
people

=e

a=
task-oriented
group — group’s
aim is to perform
a specific job

interaction-
oriented group
group’s aim to
provide social
contacts

ae

Inclusive /Exclusive Groups

Both of these categories centre around the way the group’s membership is determined.
An aim of the inclusive group is to expand activities and include more people. Small
inclusive groups tend to change over time as they expand in numbers and grow into
larger groups. For example, many church groups are inclusive groups because they
seek to expand membership to include new members.

An aim of the exclusive group is to limit
membership to those of special status or who meet
certain prescribed requirements. They are elite
groups that often insist on initiation or other
ceremonies prior to the granting of full membership.
The more difficult the initiation, the more valuable
membership in the group is perceived to be.
Members of exclusive groups may wear special
clothing, jewellery, badges, or pins to separate them
from nonmembers. Some exclusive groups demand
that new members must be sponsored by an
existing member. For example, the country club,
the yacht club, or the police force would be
exclusive groups.

Task Oriented/Interaction Oriented Groups

Both of these categories centre around the purpose of the group. The main purpose of the
task-oriented group is to perform a specific job. For example, the yearbook club has the
specific task of publishing a school yearbook. Another example: the staff at a day care are

task-oriented because their purpose is the care and supervision of the children who attend

the day care.

The main purpose of the interaction-oriented group is to foster opportunities for social
contacts or interaction. For example, a number of people in the community decide to get
together every Thursday night for a volleyball match. After a couple of games, they have a
social time. Another example: people gather at a nightclub to listen to the music, dance and
enjoy themselves; they are interaction-oriented.

Many groups will be a combination of task and interaction-oriented. For example, a weight
loss group will have a specific task of getting members to lose weight (task-oriented) and it
is also a social support system for members (interaction-oriented). Another example: the
members of a church will have the dual purpose of being both task and interaction-oriented.

116 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

[qu
group dynamics —
relationships and
interactions
experienced
within the group

social power —
control within the
group to bring
about changes

social influence —
the way group
thoughts and
behaviours
change through
group contacts

—=O

— =
external locus of
control — a belief
that one is
controlled by
outside factors

internal locus of
control — the
belief that self
determination
shapes one’s
destiny

<0)

Group Decisions and Influences

Group dynamics refers to interpersonal relationships that develop between individuals
within the group. The ways in which small groups form is significant. Social power which is
held by the individual or the group has the potential for precipitating changes. Social
influence is the term which describes the actual formation and change of attitudes, opinions,
and behaviours through group contact and interaction. If group cohesion and group loyalty
are fairly well established, the group will have considerable influence on its membership.

How is it possible for a group to influence the behaviour of individual members? Each
member’s individual input into the group decision may be small, but will be present
nonetheless. People with an external locus of control feel that sources outside of
themselves control their fate. People with an internal locus of contro! feel that their own
inner resources and self determination are responsible for shaping their destiny. Summing
things up, the locus of control hypothesis suggests that the individual most susceptible to
persuasion will be the one with the external locus of control. The individual with an internal
locus of control is less awed by authority figures and may react quite critically to any
conspicuous attempts at persuasion.

In what other ways does the group exert an influence? Shared participation means that each
member is an active part of the change process rather than a passive recipient. A public
commitment to a course of action that is witnessed by others will solidify group influence.
For example, at a meeting of the social club, the president says, “Hold up your hand if you
agree with this decision and are willing to help with the project”. That public commitment
certainly reinforces group solidarity.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 117

= y=
social norms —
group defined
standards for
acceptable and
unacceptable
behaviour

ee <<<((0))) a

= —
risky shift
hypothesis

group members
will be more
daring than an
individual acting
alone

cautious shift
hypothesis —
group decisions
are more
conservative than
an individual
acting alone

— Oe

Social support is another important factor because when the group concurs, the
individual has more confidence in the decision. For example, the yearbook club
discussed many possibilities. Finally the group voted on the most popular course of
action and the members started to plan how they would tackle the project. The group-
defined standards concerning what behaviours are acceptable or objectionable are
called social norms. For example, the social norm is that when a group meeting is
called, the group members listen to the leader and follow the rules of order.

The collective behaviour of the group can be quite distinctive from that of each participating
member. The main notion of the risicy-shilt hypothesis is that the group will be more
brave and daring in its course of action and final decisions than the individual acting alone.
For example, some students are unhappy with the way a social event is being organized in
the school. Ten people who are discontent decide to go to the principal’s office as a group
and complain. A lone complainer might be more reluctant to do that.

A somewhat different perspective is taken in the cautious-shift hypothesis which
maintains that in decisions involving a diversity of values, the group will tend to be more
conservative than individual members. A conservative strategy is pursued by the group in
decisions involving family responsibility or outright danger. For example, a social club made
money through fund-raising and the members believe it should be invested for greater
profits. Some of the members have invested their own money in some high-risk stocks. But
the group members persuade each other that the club funds must be invested in ways that
are more secure. Another example: a group of campers are stranded in the mountains.
Some of the group members propose that they negotiate a risky passage through the
mountains to reach safety, but the group as a whole decides to stay together and send up
flares until they are rescued which is the safer solution.

118 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
leadership
situation
hypothesis
individuals
assume leadership
because they can
take charge at the
right time

a <((0))

Leadership

The group leader is someone who initiates and organizes action as well as guides activities.
The leader is the individual who has the greatest influence on the members of the group. The
leader must direct the group toward goals that are appropriate and satisfying. The leader
must ensure that group goals do not run counter to goals of people outside the group or
endanger the welfare of society as a whole. The leader has tremendous responsibilities both
to those people within the group and those outside of it.

An effective leader has a double workload. The
leader directs the energies of the group toward
the attainment of certain goals. In addition, the
leader displays an awareness of the social-
emotional needs of the group.

The popular view that some people are born
leaders because they inherit certain qualities that
make them good leaders is not accepted by
experts in the field. People learn to be leaders by
studying and consciously practising good
leadership techniques. Role playing may be part
of a leadership training program. A participant is
asked to assume an imaginary leadership role.
Skills are discussed and analyzed for the
purpose of making improvements. By doing such
an exercise, the leader in training acquires the
technical skills to effectively take charge of a
group. Further, the leader gains important
insights into the attitudes and feelings connected
with this special position.

Why do certain individuals attain the position of leadership in a group? There are many
different possibilities. The leadership situation hypothesis suggests that someone
assumes a position of authority through a combination of factors related to a particular
situation. For example, in an emergency an individual who is not overcome by panic might
step forward to take charge of the situation. These people may be looked upon as heroes of
the crisis. Their term of leadership may be short or long term depending on the nature of the
problem.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 119

==
leadership
characteristics
hypothesis —
individuals
assume leadership
because they have
the qualities that
make them a good
leader

ee<<<((0))>

==
formal leader —
an individual who
is inan
established
position of
authority in the
hierarchy

informal leader —
an individual who
has the respect of
the group due to
personal
attributes

ee <<<((0))>

The leadership characteristics hypothesis proposes the theory that leadership
positions are earned by those people who have the special charismatic qualities and
organizational skills that appeal to the followers. For example, the captain of the hockey
or football team is usually someone who has the respect of the other team members.

Sometimes a leader is easily identified. The
leader is the president of the organization,
the captain of the team, the principal of the
school, or the mayor of the town. The
person is in a forma! position of authority
and he or she takes the responsibility for the
decision-making. However, informal
leaders also exist. These are the people that
have strong organizational and
communication skills. They also have the
respect of the group members. Maybe they
are not in the formal position of authority,
but the group still seeks direction from
them. If an informal leader has very different
ideas from the formal leader, the group is
bound to be splintered by dissent. The best
solution is for the formal and informal
leaders to call a truce and work together for
the overall health and welfare of the group.
For example, Bob has been president of the
community league for 8 years. Because of
other commitments, he resigns as president
but remains on the executive. The
committee members still turn to him for advice in tough matters. He is an informal leader.

120 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

—— =
democratic leader
— the head of the
group who
respects the rights
of the members
and encourages
them to assume
responsibility

autocratic leader
— the head of the
group who
governs with a
dictatorial style

— ee

—= =
laissez-faire
leader — the head
of the group who
prefers to avoid
direct involvement
with the group
—=iO

Leadership Styles

Every leader has a slightly different style of leadership. Let’s look at three main types.

A democratic leader works with group members through team work. Democratic leaders
will give guidance and direction to the group, but also participate as members of the group.
They usually have a positive effect on the group. Because the opinions of the members are
respected through the democratic process, the results are happy, efficient, and dedicated
workers. Democratic leaders are group-minded. They bring out the best in their group and
they are usually the most highly regarded of all the leaders.

The autocratic leader remains
aloof from the group but directs its
activities with a firm hand.
Autocratic leaders give detailed
instructions to the group but do not
participate to help the group
achieve its goals. Groups under the
supervision of an autocratic leaders
can harbour feelings of hostility and
aggression as well as discontent
that does not appear on the
surface. Group members are
dependent and are obedient to the
leader more out of fear than loyalty.
When autocratic leaders are absent
from the group for a while, the
members may stop working.

The laissez-faire leader is usually
very passive. The philosophy of the
laissez-faire leaders is to let things
goas they will. Laissez-faire
leaders give information if asked,
but they don’t exert much influence
on the group. With a weak leader,
the group may play more than it
works. Group members may work
for their own interests rather than
the goals of the group.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Section Three: Studying Behaviour 121

a (0) ca
small group —a
cohesive unit with
no more than
fifteen or twenty
members

ae

Distinguishing a Good Leader

Here are some of the qualities of a good leader.

¢ Leaders exhibit strong abilities in the area of intelligence, judgment, social
awareness, assessment and evaluation of skills, and sensitivity to needs.

¢ Leaders must have responsibility, self-confidence, determination, and conviction.

¢ Leaders must be sociable, actively involved, flexible in their perspective, and
maintain a sense of humour.

* Leaders must have some degree of status and popularity in the group.

* Leaders often have a good record of athletic achievement.

* Leaders are the most vocal and articulate members of the group.

Of course even some of the best leaders do not possess all of these qualities. Often
secondary leaders will emerge within the group to supplement some of the skills found
lacking in the main leader.

Small Group Dynamics — Communication And Unity

Asmaill group is a collective unit of individuals in which face-to-face relationships occur
among members. The actual number of members may vary but the group should be small
enough so that members know each other and can act as a cohesive unit. Perhaps an upper
limit of twenty members is reasonable for a small group. Some examples of small groups are
ahockey team, dance class, yearbook club, evening upgrading class, a volleyball team, or a
Sunday school class.

Why do individuals join certain small groups? People seek groups with goals and interests
similar to their own—they share the same pleasurable activities. The group satisfies the
person’s desire for social interaction and sociability. Another reason for joining the group is
for a sense of security and confidence. The group can give its members a sense of self-
esteem and personal achievement. The group gives the person recognition of his/her
achievement, by providing an audience for the work done. The individual may hope to gain
social status with memberships in some groups. Some people join organizations in order to
further their business contacts or their career opportunities. Small groups provide a strong
network of support for members in a number of ways.

122 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

y=
sociometry — the
study of how
group members
relate to each
other

Sociogram — a

chart showing the
pattern of
friendships in a
group
—=—O

What are some of the disadvantages of belonging to small groups? The small group
may not reach decisions very quickly. They may spend too much time in general
discussion. The group might focus too much attention on social activity and not enough
on work activity. Group members might agree to a bad decision suggested by one of
the members rather than risk conflict by disagreeing. Individuals may become too
consumed by the activities of the small group and therefore adopt a narrow perspective.
For example, a student becomes too wrapped up with interests in minor hockey and
never develops any other focuses.

Adults can hold memberships in many groups. Churches and labour unions are two formally
organized groups which are most popular. The more formal education people have the more
likely they are to join a group and be actively involved. People become more involved with
groups as they mature. As people become adults they can participate more effectively in
larger groups.

Can you think of some advantages of holding multiple memberships in many different
groups? Can you think of some of the problems and conflicts that may be encountered
through multiple membership?

Building Unity

One of the major aims of a small group is to build cohesiveness among members. Group
cohesiveness may be defined as the mutual, general attraction that group members feel
toward each other. Cohesiveness is togetherness combined with a willingness to cooperate.
Group cohesiveness is enhanced by common goals and the feeling of members that they
share acommon fate. Group cohesiveness is not just a vague feeling of liking other
members. Sociomety is the study of how individuals perceive, think, and feel about other
group members. It is a specific technique for measuring cohesiveness. Direct questions are
asked of group members. For example, one question would be, “Who do you work with
best in your group?” The diagram or chart that is constructed from this information to
illustrate group relationships is called a sociogram.

A) @)
©)

© © OQ WwW

SOCIOGRAM 1 SOCIOGRAM 2

«)

The connecting lines between group members in Sociogram 1 show stronger relationships
than those in Sociogram 2.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 123

— =
verbal
communication —
exchanging ideas
through the
written or spoken
word

nonverbal
communication —
exchanging ideas
through body
posture and
gestures

—<e _

Besides cohesiveness, another important measure of group strength is the morale of the
group. Morale has three main components: the prevailing attitude of group members,
the loyalty of the members to the group, and the willingness of the members to
participate in the group’s work. Morale usually emphasizes the task orientation of the
group or their willingness to work together on an assignment. The morale of each
individual personally will contribute to either a high or low morale of the group
collectively. For example, the community group had just received the Award of
Outstanding Merit for their program with low income children; morale was very high.
Another example: the sports league had just lost a third of its members due to lack of
interest; morale was very low.

The Communication Factor

Once someone has joined a small group, effective communication will keep the person
involved. Communication opens up the lines of understanding between people. Therefore it
acts as a unifying force. Communication may be defined as the interchange of thoughts,
opinions or information by means of speech, writing or signs. Communication is a message
that is transmitted from one living thing to another. Communication goes beyond receiving
sounds or symbols. A person receiving communication must be able to understand and
distinguish what is being transmitted. Without some form of communication among
members, group behaviour would not be possible. When communication takes place via the
spoken or written word, it is termed yerbal communication. When communication occurs
through gestures, signs or body posture, it is termed nonverbal communication. For
example, if you are asked a question and shrug your shoulders, that means “I don’t know”
or “I don’t care”. Putting your head down can show that you are tired.

124 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

(0) aa
hierarchy — the
power structure of
the group
—<iOa

Suppose there is a conflict between verbal and nonverbal communication. Which
message is stronger, or which one tends to be most believable? Usually nonverbal
communication has more power. It comes from our unconscious mind or our true inner
feelings. For example, when the sale clerk says, “I’d love to help you” but he or she has
a frown and stands facing you with arms crossed, you have the feeling that the verbal
message is somewhat insincere.

Information means power. The lines of communication within a group are affected by the
status of the group members. The group leader has a high status and therefore has access to
most information that is communicated. The lower status person may be reluctant to
communicate their ideas to a higher status person, especially if the higher status person will
likely disagree. Some members believe too much communication occurs in a downward
fashion from leaders to followers or from high status to low status persons. When there is a
free flow of information or a more equal exchange of ideas, the organization benefits
because all the top positions are not the only place to find creative ideas.

It has been mentioned before that information means power. In the past, ideas spread very
slowly through an organization. Therefore the power structure of an organization was very
hierarchical which means there was a rigid structure with very defined steps up the ladder
from the general membership to the leaders. For example, the structure would include
employee, supervisor, office manager, assistant director, director and president of the
company. Today, with computers, internet, and the information highway, each person in the
group can set up their own network of information and be very autonomous within a
loose framework of associates.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 125

=
loneliness — a
feeling of
yearning for the
company of others

Oe

ag
rejection — being
abandoned or
being outside the
group

ee <<<((0)))>

The Negative Side of Groups

The group can create unhappiness for the
individual in the form of loneliness which
means that people are outside the border of
the group. People who are alone are not
necessarily lonely. Loneliness must be
defined as lacking group acceptance and
support by someone who misses that
interaction. Here are a few general ideas of
why our society which is busy, sophisticated,
and full of opportunities should produce
lonely people. One reason is that people in
our society are very mobile which cuts them
off from meaningful and lasting relationships
within a group. Another reason is that our
choice of leisure activities tends to promote
solitariness. Nowadays children play
alone more than with each other. Several
years ago, children spent more time
inventing games, negotiating rules, and being part of a team during their play activities.
Currently children are involved in more solitary activities like watching TV, and playing
arcade and computer games. All of those examples tend to not invite group interaction
and may actually damage social skills if they become the focus of a person’s life for an
extended period of time. Therefore loneliness is often self inflicted. People must set
goals to be active within groups and do so.

The individual is not always to blame when group relationships deteriorate. A person can
experience rejection from personal relationships or small groups. Rejection is not entirely
negative; it gives us the opportunity to examine the situation we are in and learn valuable
lessons from it. Rejection may cause people to be more determined to accept a challenge in
order to merit group membership. Rejection teaches people that forming and reforming new
organizations is one of the facts of life. Sometimes people invite rejection from others by
their own lack of esteem and confidence. The message they give to the group is “I would
not be a worthy group member”. Other people have not learned how to put on a pleasant
demeanour and portray a positive attitude. Verbally they complain and make negative
comments. They frown or stare or refuse to make eye contact with others. These people
give the impression that they don’t like other people and they probably don’t like
themselves either. When you are confronted with rejection, use that experience in a positive
way to reform yourself and make creative choices for you outside the confines of the group.
Rejection need not be destructive. If it is analyzed and understood, it can lead to change
and growth within.

126 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

— =
xenophobia —
fear of outsiders

<a

— ==
Stockholm
Syndrome — the
process hostages
experience when
they begin to
identify with their
captors

<0)

Another very negative emotion is hatred and is usually more intense between large
groups within the society as a whole. It may be related to one of the phobias—
xenophobia which is fear of strangers or outsiders. Fear, aggressiveness, threats about
one’s future and one’s safety bring out feelings of xenophobia. Our basic group, which
can be as small as the family or as extensive as our nation, will behave benevolently
towards outside groups if our survival is not threatened by shortage of food or by
weapons. When the group is threatened, then differences with other groups are not
tolerated or accepted. Then boundaries between groups are strictly enforced.
Throughout the world today there are many examples of ethnic and religious hatred.
Within our country rival gangs readily see others as the enemy. In the United States the
Klu Klux Klan harbours a deep hatred of certain racial groups.

A special kind of group phenomenon that occurs during a lengthy crisis is termed the
Stockholm Syndrome. People who become hostages undergo very intense emotions. If the
hostage siege lasts for some time, the captives may tend to take sides with their captors and
identify with them. The Stockholm Syndrome was first identified when bank employees and
customers were trapped in a bank by a gunman over a long period of time. When the
hostages were finally freed, the police were quite amazed that these people feared for the
safety of the robber and believed the gunman was the oppressed party. During intense
emotions, group dynamics can take a dramatic turn!

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 127

= —_=—
bullies —
aggressive,
overpowering,
intimidating
people

<<)

Being Outside The Group

Dealing With Bullies

Bullies are aggressive people who derive satisfaction from overpowering and controlling
others either physically or psychologically. They don’t pick a fair fight; their victims are
weaker than they are. They are impulsive and dominant. Bullies are usually boys, but girls
bully as well. Usually bullies come from homes where parents do not give them enough
attention. The defenceless victims remind the bullies of their own vulnerability in an abusive
home which makes them strike out at their weaker victims with vengeance. Bullies tend to
over react to aggression in their peers. Often they attack peers when there is no
provocation. The typical victim is often quiet, sensitive and maybe anxious. Victims may
give the impression that they are insecure and are not worthy; bullies target children they
believe will not retaliate.

If you are singled out by a bully, don’t suffer in silence; then you could become a permanent
victim of this individual. Find a network of friends or colleagues to give you support since
bullies usually attack lone victims. If you are a school student, talk to a teacher or a
counsellor about it. Some schools get the bully and victims together to sort out the problem
with an adult mediator. Some schools offer sessions for all students where they talk about
strengths and weaknesses to give themselves a better self awareness and appreciation of
others. Some programs are for bullies only, giving them an opportunity to cope with anger
by role-playing situations involving conflict.

Although bullying is a very negative behaviour, the power of group intervention can certainly
be helpful in eliminating it or keeping it under control.

Unemployment

When people leave school as young adults, receive job training, and secure employment,
their identity becomes closely intertwined with the kind of work they do. When people
introduce themselves to strangers, they give their name and then their occupation. Our jobs
give us many essential things:

* monetary rewards which we use for survival

* agroup of colleagues who become part of our work team

* asense of dignity, purpose, and self-worth because we are able to do something
meaningful to justify our existence

Being unemployed destroys the network of support people need to satisfy all of those
important needs. Being outside the employment group makes people feel helpless and
isolated.

128 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

If you lose your job, a group of friends,
associates, and former business contacts can help
you get back on track by providing some
valuable leads in the job market.

Nowadays, more unemployed people are becoming
self-employed by using their entrepreneurial spirit to
set up their own companies or by becoming
consultants to three or four different companies.
These people have taken a new approach to
employment by working independently out of their
homes. How will the new network of independent
workers have an impact on the sense of community?
Will overall community ties be stronger or weaker?
How will it affect other areas of community spirit?

The Positive Side of Groups

At one time the family unit was one’s basic support group. For many people, this is no
longer true. Family ties are not as strong as they once were. Some families are separated by
long distances due to employment commitments and the general mobility of the population.

Strong personal friendships have replaced the
family unit as a substitute for weakened family
relationships. Close friends provide support
and an outlet for expressing our inner thoughts.
For a friendship to be strong, we must learn to
nurture it and share both time and feelings with
each other.

Friendships between women tend to be
stronger because women are more outwardly
in touch with feelings and tend to emphasis
social bonds to a greater extent. However,
men are starting to be more aware of the value
of friendships with others; even strong
friendships with other men are given attention.
In families, siblings may establish strong ties
with each other. When this occurs the
strongest connections are sister/sister
friendships, then sister/brother connections and
finally brother/brother ties because brothers
tend to be more competitive.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 129

Our strongest friendships are started when we are in school. Those relationships are
built on the strength of shared, common experiences in the formative years. Close
friends from this period of time can lose contact with each other for several years and
renew the bonds of friendship quickly if their paths cross later in life. However, deep,
constructive friendships can be built at any time in our lives. The value of this kind of
small group contact cannot be underestimated socially, emotionally, and mentally.

Winning With People

People can benefit directly by having some insight into human behaviour and how to deal
with people who have different perspectives on life. That will make our relationships more
productive. In any kind of business or group situation, “people problems” are most
prevalent. You can reduce tension and increase cooperation and harmony by developing an
understanding of how other people feel comfortable and how they approach daily tasks.

Let’s begin with a circle. Suppose all types of people in the world fit into the circle. Then
divide the circle into four equal parts; each sector would contain people with similar
perspectives and personality characteristics. One line will divide people who like to be
active in doing things versus people who like to stand on the sidelines and watch. The
second line will divide people who feel most comfortable relating to other people versus
people who prefer working with tasks.

People

2-4

Each of the sections then forms a quadrant. The people in each quadrant will be a blend of
the two intersecting lines that form their boundaries. Starting with the quadrant on the upper
right are people who emphasize harmony—they are passive and like relating to people
(counsellors, therapists). In the lower right, we have people who are thinkers and analysts—
they are passive and enjoy tasks (scientists, computer programmers). In the lower left are
people who like managing for the sake of being productive and efficient—they operate
aggressively and prefer tasks to people (supervisors, production managers). In the upper
left are people who are socializers and the “life of the party”—they are outgoing and like
relating to people (sales people, television hosts).

130 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Here is what the description looks like in diagram format.
Winning With People

People-Oriented

(feelings)
4 1
SOCIALIZER HARMONIZER
Aggressive Passive
(doing) (watching)
3 2
MANAGER THINKER

Task-Oriented
(thinking)

A more detailed description of each type of person follows. Where are you in the diagram?
What about your family members, friends, colleagues, and the people in some of your small
groups? People tend to feel most comfortable with people from the same group who have
the same perspective on life. People will also feel relatively comfortable with people in the
adjoining quadrants. However, if you think about where you fit and where some of your
strongest adversaries fit, you will realize that most often you are at odds with the people
from the opposite side of the quadrant. For example, people in #2 and #4 will tend to have
the most conflicts. People from #1 and #3 are also opposites. Is it most productive to have
amixture of people in a small group or to have like-minded individuals working together?
You might think about these questions as we take a more in-depth look at the
characteristics of each group.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 131

The People Puzzle

4—Aggressive. People-Oriented

Values Lively Social Contacts with Others

enjoys interacting with people

is arisk-taker

enjoys crisis and challenge

leads by energizing people

is fast-moving, fast-talking

is at ease with people but also likes
action

is outgoing, sociable, enthusiastic,
adaptable and spontaneous

In addition is: lively, gregarious, impulsive,
spirited, persuasive

3-Aggressive. Task-Oriented

Values Productivity, Efficiency

is ano-nonsense problem solver

is skills oriented

values strategic thinking

likes technical, hands-on tasks
makes unilateral (dictatorial) decisions
is assertive, competitive, and
intimidating

enjoys creating plans, timelines,
quotas and flow charts

values competence and quick-paced
progress

In addition is: determined, forceful, firm,
industrious, organized

132 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour

1-Passive. People-Oriented
Values Harmony With Others
¢ likes one-to-one contact
* encourages self awareness
* seeks personal insights
* is aware of factors affecting human
development
* is easy-going, caring, cooperative,
supportive

* is sensitive to feelings and personal
growth

In addition is: private, charitable, lenient,
modest, empathetic

2-Passive. Task-Oriented
Values Facts, Figures, Thinking Skills
* enjoys thinking through ideas
* isanalytical
* enjoys details and sequential
thought
¢ likes transmitting knowledge
* is well organized
* values accuracy, rationality, logic
* emphasizes precision and being right

In addition is: methodical, disciplined,
factual, efficient, contemplative

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

The People Puzzle offers some interesting insights into the way people perceive life and
their most comfortable style of
approach for work, social, leisure, and
family situations. The boundary lines
are not absolute which means you are
not exclusively one type of person. But
if you think about it carefully, one of
the four quadrants will be your most
comfortable style for a majority of the
time. When you feel a distinct
uneasiness about someone you know,
check to see if they are in the opposite
quadrant. Look at the qualities of your
opposite. Try to be objective and
unbiased. What are their strengths?
What qualities do you admire? Which
of their qualities would be especially
helpful to you if the two of you had to
work together as a team?

Summary

This lesson provided some interesting perspectives on the roles we perform throughout
our lives. It also presented a great deal of material on the nature of the group. Groups
have many special characteristics that influence the attitudes and behaviours of people
who work together collectively.

To summarize:

¢ Roles define the way people act or behave.

¢ People step into or step out of roles at various times.

¢ Roles are packages of benefits and obligations.

¢ Roles are interdependent behaviours that fit into a network or system.

¢ A social relationship is a set of reciprocal roles.

¢ Roles are based on sex (gender identity), age, kinship, and residence.

¢ Roles are arbitrarily or randomly assigned to each sex.

¢ Male roles have a higher status than female roles.

¢ The focus on the extended kinship has been replaced by the nuclear
family.

¢ Roles are ascribed (automatic at birth) or achieved (earned on merit and
hard work).

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 133

* New roles are learned through the socialization process which means the
child observes and imitates others, usually family members.

¢ Gender identity is an important task.
¢ Maleness and femaleness are determined by biological factors.

¢ Masculinity and femininity are behaviours which arise from our cultural
perspective of the sexes.

¢ Role conflicts may arise because roles are misunderstood or because roles
change which causes disruptions.

¢ Androgyny is the flexibility of combining male and female traits.

* Changes in roles may be uncomfortable, but often changes are necessary
if people want to improve.

* Rites of passage is an initiation test that people must pass before they are
given full status in a role. It is used in some circumstances but not in
others.

* Birth order proposes some interesting theories about the personalities of
first borns, middle children, and last born children.

* Group behaviour is quite different from the behaviour of individuals.

¢ Human beings have strong social needs which are satisfied through
interaction with the group.

¢ The family helps in the socialization process which refers to teaching
lessons about how to live in our culture.

¢ Peers are people who have equal status; reference groups give us our
beliefs and values.

¢ The crowd is a transitory group of people who have a sense of
togetherness for a particular objective.

* The clique is organized around class lines and is more cohesive and close-
knit.

* People identify with an in group; those outside the group are the out
group.

* The goal of inclusive groups is to expand activities and membership.

¢ The objective of exclusive groups is to limit membership to a special inner
circle.

¢ Task-oriented groups perform a specific job.

¢ Interaction-oriented groups highlight social contacts with others.

¢ Aperson’s locus of control (external or internal) will determine if the
person believes in group control or self determination.

¢ Therisky shift hypothesis states that the group will be more brave in
decision-making with the support of the whole group.

134 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

« The cautious shift hypothesis states that group decisions will be more
conservative in nature.

« Many factors affect leadership. Sometimes people assume leadership
because they can handle tough situations; others are leaders because they are
organized and have the qualities that appeal to people.

« A democratic leader has the respect and commitment of the members.
* An autocratic leader is dictatorial.
« A laissez-faire leader lets the group do what they like.

¢ Asociogram studies the small group by examining which people interact best
with each other.

* Communication is an important aid to group solidarity.

¢ People outside a group may experience loneliness and rejection.

* Fear of people outside one’s group may lead to hatred and xenophobia.

* Close friendships that last a lifetime are the strongest form of group belonging.

* The Winning With People model divides people into four quadrants with
special characteristics.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 4 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 135

Lesson 2: Emotions and Criminal Behaviour

Overview

Emotions make the living, breathing organism we call “human beings” the loving,
compassionate, fiery creatures that we are. Emotions energize our behaviour and our
relationships with others. Emotions can also take a negative turn which can make
people angry, jealous, violent and generally put them under a tremendous amount of
stress. In this lesson we will discuss the sweeping range of emotions, how we can
control their dark side, and how we can make the most of their positive qualities.

People live, work, play, and help each other in groups. They not only want to further
their own goals but want to help their fellow human beings as well. Fortunately this is
true a majority of the time. Cooperation means progress for one and all. Occasionally
serious problems cloud our relationships with others. Sometimes people set out to
intentionally harm others or to damage and destroy their property.

136 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
