Lesson 2: Emotions and Criminal Behaviour

Overview

Emotions make the living, breathing organism we call “human beings” the loving,
compassionate, fiery creatures that we are. Emotions energize our behaviour and our
relationships with others. Emotions can also take a negative turn which can make
people angry, jealous, violent and generally put them under a tremendous amount of
stress. In this lesson we will discuss the sweeping range of emotions, how we can
control their dark side, and how we can make the most of their positive qualities.

People live, work, play, and help each other in groups. They not only want to further
their own goals but want to help their fellow human beings as well. Fortunately this is
true a majority of the time. Cooperation means progress for one and all. Occasionally
serious problems cloud our relationships with others. Sometimes people set out to
intentionally harm others or to damage and destroy their property.

136 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

What causes criminal behaviour to occur? Does it just happen to the “lower elements” of
our society? Why might one member of a family be criminally deviant and the rest be law-
abiding citizens? Is the crime rate increasing? Are criminals becoming more vicious in their
crimes? Can criminal intent be predicted? These are just a few of the questions we will
tackle during our research of criminal behaviour.

Lesson 2 will focus on these topics:

¢ Aggression: Studying It From Many Angles
* How Do We Acquire Aggressive Behaviour?
* Child Abuse As a Form of Aggression

* Dealing With Difficult People

¢ Frustration and Stress

¢ Emotions and Illness

* How Children Deal With Death

* Suicide

* Defense Mechanisms

¢ Nurturing Our Positive Emotions

* Pets and Emotions

* Touch Can Calm Emotions

* Criminal Statistics

* The Psychology of Victimization

* Violence in the Home

* Effect of Violence in the Media

* Youth Crime and the Young Offenders’ Act
* Kleptomania and Pyromania

* The Psychopath

¢ Sexual Assault

* Cults

* Criminal Profiles

Aggression: Studying It From Many Angles

Aggression is often misunderstood, feared and generally viewed as distasteful. What is
aggression? One definition of aggression states that aggression is any action that directly or
indirectly inflicts harm on others. The word aggression is used to describe behaviour that
ranges from asserting one’s personal interests to violent, physical action. Two things most
often associated with aggression are anger and a surge of power. Aggressive people
communicate in a loud, commanding manner. They may put people down or use sarcasm in
their speech.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 137

Passive behaviour is the opposite of aggressive behaviour. It involves avoiding
confrontations and being led or controlled by someone else. Although it is common belief
that passive behaviour is very civilized, such behaviour can prove to be unhealthy. Failure
to respond to any conflict or difficult situation can result in unsatisfactory lifestyle choices.
For example, failure to state preferences as to how you would like to spend leisure time
may mean that you always do what your friends want to do. In this case you may be
disappointed at your friends’ choices, and yet never give yourself a chance to develop your
own preferences. Passiveness may also be called submissiveness. Passive people often
withdraw altogether from social interaction or remain meekly in the background.

How does assertiveness compare to aggressiveness? Assertiveness refers to behaviour such
as standing up for one’s rights and interests and actively coping with disagreeable situations.
Assertive people approach situations with a win-win goal in mind. They stick up for their
rights by speaking up in a bold and insistent manner, but at the same time they show respect
toward others. Assertive people have many positive skills which include:

* personal independence: high levels of self-confidence

* leadership skills: a sense of personal power when approaching situations

* strong social skills: listening to others, initiating and handling conversations with ease
and finesse

Aggression

< = 0 + >
Violence Passive Assertiveness
Behaviour

Anger is an intense emotion, but it is not always destructive. It can lead to greater awareness
and understanding if the individuals concerned can de-escalate the conflict and talk over a
possible solution. Assertive people feel anger, but deal with it by trying to find constructive
ways to resolve the problem.

Here are some situations in which assertiveness is appropriate:

* when restaurant services or purchases are not satisfactory

* when someone disturbs you by talking loudly at a movie, play, or concert

* telling someone good news about yourself (not in a boastful way)

* resisting sales pressure

* refusing an unreasonable request

* meeting the challenge of conversing with someone who does not share your point of
view

* requesting a return of borrowed items

138 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Are aggression and violence related?
Violent behaviour can be defined as
unjust or unwarranted exertion of force
or power; injurious actions leading to
physical damage or harm. Violence is
the most extreme form of aggression in
which threats, force, and hostile action
are characteristic. In the interests of
survival, some forms of aggression are
acceptable, but violence is considered
destructive and harmful. For example, if
ahockey player body checks another
player in aclean, sportsman like way,
he is being aggressive, if a hockey
player uses his stick to deliberately
injure another player he is acting ina
violent manner.

When people continually suppress their hostility and don’t come to terms with it, violent
kinds of aggression may erupt. Police records confirm the fact that some of the most vicious
crimes have been committed by individuals who are perceived to be very gentle, quiet and
conservative. Much hostility can be traced back to poor communication skills.

More will be said about violence and crime later in this lesson.

How Do We Acquire Aggressive Behaviour?
Aggression is inborn or human beings are born with aggressive tendencies.

The theory that aggression is instinctive states that aggression is a necessary instinct for the
survival of the individual and the species as a whole. This was especially true for our early
ancestors because their world was full of daily, life-threatening turmoil. The human body
was equipped to survive such dangers. For example, the male hormone testosterone or
androgen appears to increase the reaction to respond aggressively.

According to the inborn theory of aggression, although our lives are more secure nowadays,
we are still born with the instinct for aggression. Robust youngsters are assertive in gaining
attention in order to fulfill their needs. Normal, everyday activities like play, curiosity, and
exploration of the world involve some element of aggression from the average infant. A baby
who is too passive may be ill in some way.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 139

Aggression is learned.

The other perspective on aggression is that the individual is not aggressive until external
factors set up a frustrating situation which leads to aggression. According to this theory,
aggression occurs when people experience conflict and frustration rather than through
inherited characteristics.

Since children are emotionally close to their parents, aggressive behaviour from parents
sets a negative example for the children. Aggression appears to be intensified by power-
oriented child rearing techniques such as frequent and overly strict physical punishments and
threats. The proper handling of rewards and punishments by parents is important so the
dark side of aggression does not become established.

Anonymity is the act of hiding one’s identity and becoming nameless. When people
are allowed to be anonymous, aggression has a tendency to increase. Personal
anonymity removes the fear of other people’s disapproval and censure. Accountability
no longer holds the conscience in check so people feel more free to behave
aggressively. For example, the Klu Klux Klan practise their aggressive deeds in
disguise. Another example: many people seem to be less inhibited at a costume party
where their identity is hidden.

Overcrowding is another factor that can create feelings of anonymity and contribute to
aggressive behaviour. In crowded cities, people construct emotional barriers to protect
themselves from the psychic overload of frequent contact with many strangers. These
barriers create a private space in a fast paced and impersonal environment. A sense of
community and personal responsibility for the rights of others often does not exist in
metropolitan areas. Psychic overload can cause people to withdraw from others and
become immune to their feelings.

Whether aggression can be accepted as an innate inborn drive or whether aggression is

merely a response to frustration arising from adverse external conditions has still not
been resolved.

140 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Child Abuse As a Form of Aggression

Child abuse is a highly condemned form of aggression which is often successfully
hidden from public criticism by the offenders. Some of the injuries inflicted on helpless
youngsters by parents and family members are unbelievable and horrifying.

Sometimes parents have extremely high expectations for their children at
inappropriately early ages. They use harsh measures to enforce demands on their
children which can lead to child abuse. Abusing parents were often abused children
themselves. Because these individuals grew up seeing abusive techniques used as a form of
discipline, they may believe it is a natural way to raise their children. Another reason
parents abuse their kids is a lack of parenting skills. They really don’t know how to raise a
child. Parenting involves tremendous responsibility and some stress. When frustrations build
up in the home, the parents may lash out with uncontrolled anger.

In 75% of the cases of child abuse, parents are responsible. Babysitters, step parents
and other relatives may be found at fault to a lesser degree. Sometimes for their own
safety and best interests, the child must be removed from the home. Usually this action
is taken only if the child is in serious physical danger. While separating the child from
the abusive family member is important, the child may be unhappy with such a
solution. From the child’s point of view, he or she is being punished in a sense by being
removed from the familiarity of the home environment. Another solution to correct
abusive parenting is counselling for the whole family. Parents learn anger management
and how to teach their children responsibility and problem solving in a nonviolent way.

Besides mental and physical abuse, children can be sexually abused by people they
love and trust. Adults are in a position of power and authority which makes it relatively
easy to sexually abuse a child. The pain of betrayal can scar the child for life and may
interfere with the development of intimate relationships as adults. Sexually abused
children have intense feelings of shame and guilt even though they are innocent
victims. They feel isolated and develop feelings of low self-esteem. Some abused
children are too confused or afraid to report what is happening to them and thus some
of them endure many years of mistreatment. As adults, they may become abusers
themselves. Physically they may develop chronic pain of one kind or another. Some
may have eating disorders. Emotionally, they may turn to alcohol, promiscuity, and
even prostitution in some cases. Feelings of depression or suicidal thoughts are other
symptoms.

Adults who have a reasonable suspicion that a child is
being physically or sexually abused have an obligation
to report it to the authorities. In Alberta, the Child
Abuse Hotline has been established to handle
emergency calls on a 24 hour basis. The number is 1-
800-668-6868.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 141

Dealing With Difficult People

There are many difficult people in the world and from time to time everyone will come face-
to-face with them. Difficult people may complain constantly or may try to be manipulative to
get their way. A difficult person is simply someone who causes problems for others. But
although the definition is simple, the solutions take effort before the situation is resolved.

Here are some constructive questions to ask when faced with conflicts:

* How do you define the problem?

* How does the other person define the problem?

* How does your behaviour contribute to the problem?

* How does the other person’s behaviour contribute to the problem?

¢ What events tend to set the conflict in motion?

¢ What are areas of agreement between the two of you?

¢ What are some of your strengths that could be used to resolve the conflict?
* What are some goals you have in common with the other person?

* How will you celebrate your success when the conflict is resolved?

To work through these questions, you must be honest and
objective as possible. That is usually difficult because we
usually see ourselves as blameless and the other person as the
villain. If you believe resolving the conflict is important, you
must go beyond that line of reasoning.

Dealing with difficult people will generate feelings of anger and
aggression. Here are some effective ways of dealing with
these emotionally powerful forces.

Admit Anger — In general most people tend to block the true picture of anger, with the
result that itis driven underground where it becomes a source of future hostility. They
believe that anger is a sign of immaturity and they feel guilty.

Pinpoint the Source of Anger — In this step you become more focused on the specific
problem. The most effective way to handle annoying situations is to begin by controlling
your own behaviour. In a situation with a lot of anger and conflict, if we lose control of our
emotions or internalize the hurt feelings and withdraw, we cannot reach a healthy solution.
Ask yourself a lot of thoughtful questions to uncover the real source of anger.

142 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Approach Anger Head-On — Good communication skills are essential to resolving
conflicts that result from anger. Try to own your anger rather than resorting to blame.
Instead of saying, “you made me angry” (which means someone else can control your
feelings), say, “I feel angry when you...” or “I chose to feel angry because...”. We let other
people control us by giving us negative feelings. Absence of blame will help you and others
resolve the conflict. We must not become engulfed in emotions because that weakens our
ability to do some clear-headed thinking.

Carefully Examine Your Reaction to Anger — Did the anger arise from fear, insecurity,
rejection, resentment, or a feeling of injustice? The key step when dealing with difficult
people is to organize your thoughts and concentrate on solving the problem instead of
rebutting negative comments which simply escalates the anger. You might paraphrase the
problem they have put before you. That shows you are listening to them and trying to gain
an understanding of their concerns. You may also take notes and ask questions for
clarification. By using those methods, you direct your energies to solving the problem
instead of exchanging insults.

Frustration

Frustration may be defined as the thwarting or
blocking of behaviour that will help us to reach our
goals. As the definition suggests people want to
follow a certain course of action but their efforts are
defeated. What are some frustrating situations we
may encounter? For example, you cannot find an
important book that is overdue at the library and
spend all Saturday afternoon searching for it. Another
example: you may have wanted to enter a particular
occupation but found you didn’t have the aptitude or
financial resources to pursue that career. Some
frustrating situations are momentary and insignificant.
Others may be long term and much more devastating.

Frustration tolerance is the ability of an individual to
handle frustration without becoming maladjusted or too upset. People exhibit a variety of
behaviours when they meet frustrating events. They may withdraw if they feel they cannot
cope with the conditions. They may become angry. Well adjusted people accept some
measure of frustration as a normal event that occurs in the real world from time to time.
Rather than feeling helpless, the emotionally secure individuals readjust their goals and plan
around the blockades that arise.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 143

—— =
approach-

approach —a
situation that has
two alternative
choices which are
both positive

ee <<((0)))>

==
approach
gradient — the
closer one is to an
attractive goal,
the stronger is the
pull toward the
goal

avoidance-
avoidance — a
situation that has
two alternative
choices which are
both negative

avoidance
gradient — the
closer one is toa
negative or
frightening
situation, the
stronger is the
pull to get away
from the situation

ee <((0)

Conflict can occur when an individual must choose between alternatives. Sometimes the
consequences are not important to us. When the decision is easy, we simply pick an
alternative at random and therefore conflict is very minor. But at other times the decision is
weighty and the alternatives become quite significant to us.

Approach—approach, Avoidance—avoidance, Approach—avoidance

There are three kinds of conflicting situations: approach—approach, avoidance—
avoidance, and approach—avoidance

Approach—approach is a positive win/win situation. When you are offered two
attractive choices, you are enticed by both possibilities. Both alternatives are equally
desirable in the approach—approach conflict. You may ask, “Why would it be
considered a conflict if everything is positive?” We consider each choice in turn and
may waver from one to the other until we finally decide. Sometimes we put our
decision on hold until we have a chance to think about it. Gradually one alternative will
gain a slight edge over the other and we decide in its favour. Later we may reverse our
decision. Approach—approach conflicts sound easy to solve, but we are often fearful
that we may miss some important factors and take second best. For example, your
friend asks you to go to an exciting party where you know you’ll have a great time.
The same night is a concert 100 km away; the entertainers will be superb. Which one
do you choose?

The approach gradient is the term used to describe the increase in the strength of the
pull toward an attractive goal, the closer the individual gets to the goal. Once you have
decided on a goal, all of your attention and energy is directed toward reaching that goal.

Avoidance—ayoidance is not a good situation to be facing. You are offered two
unattractive choices and are asked to choose one. Your strategy here will be to assess
both possibilities carefully and take the lesser of two evils. For example, you have a
special project for science class which is difficult, complicated and time-consuming.
You wish to avoid it. The other alternative is that the teacher will call out your name in
class if the assignment is not done which is embarrassing. In addition, you risk the
chance of getting a low grade or failing the course. Therefore you are experiencing an
avoidance—avoidance conflict.

The avoidance gradient is the term used to describe the increase in the strength of the
tendency of an individual to avoid an undesirable goal the closer one gets to the goal.
For example, if you have a great fear of reptiles, when you visit the zoo and approach
the reptile enclosure, the closer you get, the harder you will find it to control the urge to
make a fast exit.

144 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Ee
approach-
avoidance — a
situation that has
a combination of
posi
negative
alternatives

ee <«<((0))>

ve and

=
stress —a
condition of
strain, pressure,
tension or
hardship

stressor stimuli
the factors which
create stress

stress reaction
the response
given to control
or improve a
stressful situation

Oe

The third type of conflicting situation is approach—avoidance. That type of situation has
both positive and negative values. Few choices in our lives are either all good or all bad.
Many of our choices will have a mixture of both. We are pulled in opposite directions as we
focus on the good points and then the bad points. For example, you have just baked a tasty
casserole. When you pull it out of the oven you are tempted to taste it (approach). But you
also remember what it feels like to burn your mouth on hot food, so you set it aside to cool
(avoidance). Approach— avoidance conflicts are usually much more complex than that,
especially when they occur in the area of our personal relationships.

The Power of Stress

Like frustration and conflict, stress is an inevitable part of our lives. What is stress?
Stress is effort, strain, intense exertion, and pressure from adverse conditions that make
demands of an individual. Stressor stimuli is the term which describes the factors
creating stress. Stress reaction is the defense used to respond to or conquer stress. For
example, getting a severe cold would be a stressor stimuli. The stress reaction would be
taking suitable medication, drinking soups and juices, and getting extra rest.

Stressor stimuli can be any one of a number of things: illness, emotional upheaval,
physical restraint, or physical dangers. The body’s adrenal system becomes ready to
cope with the stressful situation after being stimulated by the hormone ACTH.

Faulty reactions to stress can be very damaging. If the body perceives a threat and acts
accordingly, stress is the same whether the threat was real or imagined. People are
encouraged to find their own best stress level whether it is low (with lots of relaxation)
or high (because the individual thrives on pressure and challenges).

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 145

=
syntoxic — a
response which
focuses on
acceptance or
accommodation

catatoxic — a
response which
takes an
aggressive
approach to
handling stress

— Oe

== —
anxiety —a
general state of
fear, dread, or
uneasiness

—<te _

One of the outstanding authorities on stress is a Canadian, Dr. Hans Selye, from the
University of Montreal. Dr. Selye believes that stress is a natural and essential state for
everyone. We even experience some stress when we sleep. No stress means death!

Dr. Selye classifies two body reactions when stress occurs. Syntoxic means to live with
or to adjust to something. For example, you live in an apartment with noisy neighbours
in the suite directly above you. You turn up your TV and CD player a little louder to
drown out some of the noise. Catatoxic means to attack. For example, you live in an
apartment with noisy neighbours in the suite directly above you. You knock on their
door to ask them to be more quiet or you complain to the landlord.

Stress comes in two basic types, healthy and unhealthy. Yes, stress can be healthy!
Normal stress is beneficial from the point of view that it makes people alert, responsive
and often more efficient. Some of our emotions centering around stress and tension can
be very exciting. Certain sports activities contribute to healthy stress. Stress becomes
dangerous to our health when our bodies get geared up for stress, the stressful situation
passes, but we cannot turn off the stress button. Stress becomes continuous. The body’s
defenses may deteriorate when stress becomes permanent.

Two reactions to stress are fear and anxiety. Anxiety is a general feeling of uneasiness
arising from the expectation of a threatening situation from an unknown source. For
example, Martha was starting a new job. Everything seemed fine, but she still felt very
nervous and uneasy although she couldn’t pinpoint why. Fear usually originates with a
specific threat such as financial difficulties, possibility of losing one’s job, or actual
physical danger.

146 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Stress List

Stress appears in many forms. As Dr. Selye has pointed out, no stress means death. A wise
approach to stress is to make sure that pressures do not bombard us from all directions at
once. That is similar to having ten large airplanes attempting to land at the airport all at the
same time.

Here are some of the situations we face at one time or another that can be stressful.
Personal changes in our lives generate some intense feelings.

¢ Death of a spouse
¢ Divorce

* Death of aclose family member

* Personal injury or illness

¢ Getting married

* Laid off work

* Buyingahome

* Gaining anew family member

* Death of aclose friend

¢ Change to a new line of work

* Outstanding personal achievement

¢ Change in residence

* Trouble with the boss

¢ Christmas or a major family celebration

* Serious disagreement between family members or friends
* Caraccident

¢ Surgery

* Being a victim of crime

¢ Budgeting problems

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 147

— =
psychosomatic
illness — an illness
or unhealthy
condition brought
about by
emotional
pressures

=e

Emotions and Illness

Stress can hamper the healthy functioning of the gastrointestinal tract and the autonomic
nervous system. Loss of appetite, migraine headaches, allergies, ulcers, high blood pressure,
muscle tensions, and heart disease are a few of the many body responses to stress. Stress
may precipitate psychosomatic illness. These illnesses arise from the mind or emotions but
the body symptoms that occur are quite real. We will learn more about psychosomatic
illness in a later lesson.

There may be some truth to the vulnerability
hypothesis. As an organism becomes more
biologically vulnerable, stress gains the upper hand.
Studies have been done noting connections
between stress and the overall health of the
individual with ordinary infectious diseases such as
cold, strep throat, and the flu. How much stress
the person has in their lives and whether or not
individuals have a mild or severe case of these
illnesses seems to correlate.

Scientists are accumulating evidence that strongly
suggests a biochemical link between one’s
emotional state, the immune function, and the
progression of one of our most serious illnesses—
cancer. Scientists know that the central nervous
system has hook-ups to the endocrine or hormonal
system and the immune system. They also know
there are biological pathways linking the central
nervous system to the tumours.

It has been recognized that the health of a patient’s spirit is as important as the health of the
patient’s body. When people learn the news that they have cancer, it comes as a devastating
blow. Doctors say it commonly takes several days before the emotional turmoil begins to
subside and the person can think rationally about treatment and discuss it realistically. Self-
help groups are very important in helping patients cope with the reality of the disease.

148 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

How Children Deal With Death

It is best to deal with issues of death before the child actually experiences it first-hand.
Three or four years of age could be a good time to start. If young children are prepared for
small deaths like a dead bird or animal, then they will be prepared for the more significant
deaths they will face later on in life such as the death of grandparents, extended relatives,
family members, or pets. The emotional pain a young child experiences connected with
death involves shock, anger, worry, perhaps guilt, and sometimes feelings of abandonment.

Children may not necessarily show grief through crying. Behaviour such as aggression,
withdrawal, moodiness, eating disruptions, and sleeping disorders are common signals that
the child is grieving. Young children are usually not capable of verbally expressing their grief.
Children may be comfortable expressing grief through artwork, music, or play activities such
as role playing a funeral. Older children will find some therapy by being involved in
commemorative activities of some kind.

These tips may be useful for adults when helping children deal with death.

¢ Bestraightforward and don’t use euphemisms like “they have gone to sleep”. Phrases
like that connected to death experiences may cause the child to have nightmares about
falling asleep. Death can be explained by saying that when people are dead their
bodies don’t work anymore. When people die they are gone from our lives and do
not return.

¢ Talk openly about the situation. Emphasize that death is a normal part of our lives.
Paraphrase some of their statements about their grief to show you understand.

¢ Mention that the dead go to a place that is safe and good. But stress that they should
not take steps to join the dead.

* Get the child to think about
the happy times they had
with the deceased. Talk
about the person or pet
who died. Listen to their
expressions of grief.
Reassure them that itis OK
to feel as they do.

* Talk to the child about what
can be done to help him/her
through the process of
mourning. Eventually they
will establish new directions
and invest in new
relationships.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 149

Suicide

Canada has the third highest teen suicide rate in the world. Within Canada, Nunavut has the
highest rate of teenage suicide. In 1997, Alberta’s suicide rate of 14.3 deaths per 100,000
people was the second highest in Canada. When you examine total suicide deaths, most
involve teenage or young adult males.

Women attempt suicide nine times more frequently than men. However, men use guns more
often as a means of committing suicide, so their completion rate is higher. When women
attempt to commit suicide, they tend to use drug overdoses, so if they are rushed to the
hospital in time, there is more of a chance they can be saved. Women have more of a
tendency to reach out to others and give warning signals that they might be contemplating
suicide. Most people who attempt suicide have given some type of warning sign, but that
can be missed if you don’t know what to look for.

Suicide can be traced to a wide range of factors such as poverty, isolation, divorce,
family alcoholism, prejudice, intense negative pressure from peers, and academic
pressures. All of these situations can plunge people into serious depression.
Unemployment can trigger suicide because it can destroy an individual’s self-esteem.

People who harbour thoughts of suicide need professional counselling. But here are
some general tips to keep in mind if you are close to someone who feels emotionally
distraught:

* Watch people who seem to be chronically unhappy. Try to introduce them to
situations that will boost their self-esteem. Listen calmly and show you care.

* Building up self-confidence is more helpful than simply sending people messages
about the horrors of suicide.

* Being able to share feelings with a spouse or close friend may reduce the risk of
suicide.

* Get professional help when people repeatedly talk of suicide. Don’t agree to keep
their secret about committing suicide.

We must remember that suicide is an individual choice. Never blame anyone when it
happens. There is a great tendency for family and friends to feel guilty when suicide
occurs. Be honest with your feelings so you don’t set up any barricades which will
prevent you from working through your feelings of bereavement.

Feelings that survivors display when suicide deaths occur are different than for other
causes of death. First, people feel numb as a means of self protection from the death.
Second, their emotions come forward in various ways as they acknowledge their grief.
Finally, they begin to feel more comfortable with their feelings and begin to take small
steps to get on with their lives.

Everyone expresses grief in their own personal way. Bereavement takes time.

150 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=
defense
mechanisms — a
behaviour
response to
conflict or
frustration which
gives the
individual some
protection

De

Defense Mechanisms

Sigmund Freud was the first psychologist to categorize and describe defense
mechanisms. A defense mechanism may be defined as a behaviour that an individual
uses in response to frustration or conflict. They are protective measures which shelter
the individual’s self-esteem when threatened. Defense mechanisms keep people from
getting overly anxious. They go into action automatically before a person becomes
aware of building anxiety and keep the person from becoming too upset.

Defense mechanisms are unconscious
responses. We are usually not aware of using
them and do not deliberately choose to use
them for our protection.

How do defense mechanisms work? They
alleviate anxiety by using methods that deny,
falsify or distort reality. They are indirect and
sometimes self defeating ways of coping with
problems even though the individual employs
them with good intentions in mind. Defense
mechanisms may be either desirable or
undesirable depending on how and to what
degree they are used. We will now examine
some of the more popular types of defense
mechanisms.

Defense mechanisms can be grouped in these categories:

* repression, suppression, reaction formation

* compensation, overcompensation, sublimation
* projection, introjection, identification

* procrastination

* displaced aggression

* rationalization

* regression

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 151

Defense Mechanisms

Displaced Aggression

Regression

Reaction Formation
Suppression :

Overcompensation
Repression ss
Compensation @

Projection

Sublimation

Procrastination

Rationalization

152 Section Three: Study ing Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

— =
repression —
“forgetting”
unpleasant
situations by
pushing them out
of our awareness

tO

(0) aaa
denial — refusing
to admit or
acknowledge a
painful
experience

ae

gE —
amnesia — loss of
memory due to
physical or
psychological
factors

Oe

Repression

Repression is a way of dealing with impulses that threaten a person’s security. An
individual tries to do away with a wish or desire by refusing to acknowledge its
presence. epression refers to the act of pushing out of awareness any thought,
feeling, or impulse that causes anxiety. After the threat is removed, safeguards or
barriers are set up to bar the return of these thoughts.

Repression is a form of motivated
forgetting which pushes problems aside.
For example, many people are anxious
about being angry for fear of what the
consequences may be. They repress their
anger by refusing to show such feelings.
The repressed feelings are there but the
individual is not aware of them. However,
to compensate the individual may have
very angry dreams or anger may slip out
as sarcastic remarks, or the body may
develop a physical illness like high blood
pressure.

Denial like repression is a refusal to admit
reality. It is less drastic than repression,
and is usually just used as a temporary
means to avoid the unpleasant. For
example, often denial is used to defend
against unpleasant events like the death of
a loved one especially when one first hears
the news. The survivor cannot admit that
the loved one is really gone. The person who denies a painful experience can still recall
it; it is not totally erased from memory as in the case of repression.

A severe form of repression is amnesia. When amnesia occurs the person represses or
forgets personal memories, but they do not need to be relearned when memory is
restored. The person’s general knowledge remains intact because it is not threatening
and therefore this information is not repressed. For example, a person with amnesia can
still remember general knowledge like how to count to ten, speak a foreign language, or
play a musical instrument. But the amnesia causes them to forget personal knowledge
like their name, their family members, and their place of residence. You will learn more
about amnesia in a later lesson.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 153

a (0) aaa
suppression —
remaining
somewhat aware
of covering up
unpleasant
information

Oe

==
reaction
formation

taking on
characteristics or
assuming
behaviours that
are completely
opposite to one’s
true nature

compensation —
making up for
shortcomings in
one area by
focusing on
area

Suppression

Suppression is closely related to repression yet it is distinctive in its own way.
Suppression is a deliberate, conscious act to cover up a wish or a desire. Unlike
repression, suppression occurs with some awareness by the person. A person using
suppression is somewhat aware that he/she is using this defense mechanism.

Let’s look at some examples.

Repression: A child has the urge to hit his father. However, this is unpleasant to the
child so he wishes that impulse out of existence. He says and believes
that he never had such an impulse.

Suppression: A child has the urge to hit his father but acts as if he had no such
feeling. The child is aware of the feeling but takes measures to keep it
hidden.

Reaction Formation

Remember the definition of repression you learned earlier? Sometimes repression isn’t
enough of a defense. When this is the case a person adds additional defenses, behaving
exactly the opposite to the way he/she really wants to behave. Such a defense is called
reaction formation. Reaction formation can be distinguished for its flagrance,
exaggeration, and compulsiveness. For example, although John is actually a very shy
and dependent individual, he becomes a loud and demanding executive in charge of a
large and successful company. Another example: a mother who resents the many
demands of her children may become overprotective of them; she is acting in an
opposite way to her true feelings. Further example: Tommy is a shy fifteen year old. He
really likes Maria, but ignores her or acts gruff in her presence to hide his real feelings.

Compensation

Compensation refers to an attempt to make up for a deficiency in one area by putting
forth extra effort in another area in order to be competent in that field. Compensation can be
a positive way of meeting frustrations and may lead to good mental health. The bonus may
be that the person might be better off than when the frustration began. A problem may
remain if you gain a sense of competence in a new area, but

have not necessarily resolved your anxiety about your
lack of skill in the original problem area.
Compensation means that people direct their
energy to the pursuit of a substitute goal. For
example, Tommy is a failure in sports activities
and therefore he is concerned about his lack of
athletic skills. He devotes his attention to studying
about and repairing cars. He is using
compensation.

154 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=e
overcompensation
— overcoming
feelings of
weakness or
inferiority by
putting forth a
superhuman effort

— <a

== —
sublimation —
channelling
sexual or aggres-
sive energy into
more socially
acceptable
endeavours

Oe

(0) aaa
projection —
putting the blame
on others for
one’s own
shortcomings

— <a

Overcompensation

Overcompensation refers to an excessive attempt to overcome feelings of inferiority and
inadequacy by engaging in other activities. The key word here is excessive or extreme. For
example, if Tommy worked day and night fixing cars and declared he would continue doing it
until he was the most outstanding mechanic in the whole city, he would be overcompensating.
This is an extreme case of, “T’ll show them what I can do!”

When you undermine your abilities and make self depreciating statements, you may be using a
form of overcompensation. You overcompensate for your lack of skill by making yourself sound
worse than you are, hoping someone will come to your aid. By doing so you hope someone will
tell you that you aren’t as bad as you think you are.

Sublimation

Sublimation is a special type of compensation. When a socially unacceptable motive involving
aggression or sex is directed into a socially useful or acceptable channel, this type of
compensation is called su}limation. The energy of the original negative impulse finds other
suitable outlets, thus reducing tension and leading to satisfying behaviour. Sublimation channels
energy into intellectual, humanitarian, artistic and cultural pursuits for the benefit of all. For
example, a poet may be upset with a terrible injustice and may write vivid, profound poetry.
Sublimation is a kind of transformation of energy in which the progression is from something

which is crude or unacceptable to a more “‘sublime” type of motivation or one with higher social
value.

The use of sublimation as a defense mechanism often results in creative activity that can become
valuable to society. When a person uses sublimation as a defense mechanism, the person is
actually modifying a primitive urge in order to conform to society. For example, a young man falls
in love with a girl whom he cannot marry. Later in life he becomes a famous artist.

Projection

Projection refers to the behaviour in which a
person alleviates anxiety about his or her own
motives by attributing those motives to other
people. A person may blame someone else for
their own shortcomings or unacceptable
beliefs. By associating these qualities with other
people, individuals are putting a distance
between the undesirable quality and themselves
thereby reducing anxiety. People who fear they

o-~
have faults often take the aggressive approach a :
by blaming others. They accuse everyone but = .

themselves of having intolerable impulses. For example, a student has the urge to cheat on an
exam; the student blames fellow classmates for being a group of cheaters instead. That makes the
rest of the class look bad instead of the student.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 155

==
introjection —
taking on the
characteristics of
others in order to
gain acceptance
from them

ee

== —
identification —
adopting the
behaviour and
mannerisms of
someone who is
admired

ee <<<((0)>

===
procrastination
putting off or
delaying a task to
avoid the
possibility of
failure

a <<<((0)

Introjection

As social beings, we all seek acceptance from others. An individual uses introjection
or takes onto themselves an attribute or characteristic that belongs to someone else with
the hope of gaining acceptance from others. That is, by becoming like the admired
group they will be accepted into the circle of friendship. For example, if you wish to
join a group of girls that have a reputation for being real tomboys, you will deliberately
imitate their style, mannerisms, and interests in order to be accepted by them.

Identification

identification is a process by which a person
adopts the values, mannerisms, clothing, and
hairstyles of an idol or hero. For example,
Peter took the sweater number of his favourite
hockey player. Peter used the same hockey
moves on the ice and even began talking like
his idol did in interviews. Sometimes prisoners
begin to identify with their captors. We found
that was true when people were held hostage
for some time and the Stockholm Syndrome
was exhibited. Some people identify with
sports celebrities or popular entertainers.
Sometimes a friend or family member may be
the person’s idol. An individual who always
finds satisfaction by identifying with the
accomplishments of others may neglect setting
their own goals for personal success.

Introjection and identification seem very
similar. What is the key difference between the
two of them? The basic motive for both
defense mechanisms is the same—conforming
in order to gain acceptance. Introjection, however, tends to be group-oriented, while
identification is usually individually-oriented.

Procrastination

Procrastination refers to a person’s attempt to avoid anxiety by putting off an undesirable
task and therefore getting temporary relief from the stressful situation. By procrastinating, a
person reduces fear of failure by postponing that possibility. For example, a student
may procrastinate or delay starting work on a difficult project or term paper. Setting
aside a problem or running away from it reduces the fear of coming face-to-face with
something that is overwhelming in case we fail in our efforts.

156 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC Genevral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

a= —
displaced
aggression —
transferring
hostility from the

original source of

frustration to a
person or object
not directly
associated with it

Oe

==
rationalization —
justifying one’s
behaviour by
giving false
reasons that are
more socially
acceptable than
the real reasons

ee <<<((0))) a

==
regression —
retreating toa
less mature, more
childish level of
behaviour which
seems like a safer
way to meet
problems
=O

Displaced Aggression

Displaced aggression is a reaction involving the transfer of emotion from the person or
object that caused the emotion to a safer or less threatening person or object. We sometimes
direct our anger not at the cause of the anger but at a target that will not retaliate. For
example, if you have had a bad day at work and your car engine stalls on the drive home,
you may get out and kick the tires. That is displacement of aggression from frustrations at
work to kicking the tires.

Two general rules seem to characterize displaced aggression. The new object of aggression
must have certain features in common with the original object. At the same time the new
object must be different from the original one to some degree, or the person will be inhibited
from showing aggression towards it.

Rationalization

Rationalization is the process of finding good reasons
to replace real reasons. The real reason is not an
acceptable one and is either repressed or denied.
Rationalization is similar to making excuses or alibis.
People explain their behaviour in terms of socially
approved reasons. When people use rationalization,
they attempt to deceive themselves. The explanation for
their behaviour saves their sense of pride. For example,
you are shopping for a sweater and see two you like.
The store clerk gives you the price of both sweaters and
one is extremely expensive so you choose the other
one. You tell everyone you chose this sweater because it
had the best style and fit. You are rationalizing because
you don’t want to admit that the other sweater was too
expensive for you. The key phrase linked to
rationalization is not giving true reasons for your
actions.

Regression

Jegression involves retreating to an earlier or simpler developmental level requiring less
mature responses. Fear is one of the usual reasons why a person runs away from a situation.
Even well adjusted people may regress on occasion in order to reduce anxiety or stress. For
example, daydreaming is a regressive activity; it involves withdrawing into the self to secure
pleasure by wish fulfillment. Another example is inventing an imaginary illness in order to
gain sympathy and attention from others. Bursting into tears at the slightest hint of frustration
or getting drunk are further examples of regression.

Sometimes regressive behaviour is clearly childish in nature. For example, Sue had a hard
day at work. As soon as she got home, she curled up in bed with her teddy bear.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 157

Negative Aspects of Defense Mechanisms

All defense mechanisms are self deceptive in nature and are employed by people when
they feel threatened. All people use a number of defense mechanisms suggesting that
people often feel threatened at some time or another in their lives. Continual,
indiscriminate use of defense mechanisms can have unhealthy consequences in the long
run because people are merely treating the symptoms rather than the causes. Defense
mechanisms reduce the guilt and anxiety, but do not remove the factors producing the
threat. For example, Daniel continually used projection when he faced failure in a task.
He never seriously thought about his own deficiencies and how he could correct them.

In summary, when defense mechanisms become the dominant mode of problem
solving, an individual wastes great time and energy maintaining the defense
mechanisms. The person directs little effort into constructive work which could be
useful in solving the problem. In extreme cases abusing defense mechanisms may lead
to personality maladjustment.

Positive Aspects of Defense Mechanisms

When used in moderation, defense mechanisms can help people adjust to tough
situations. They can absorb the shock of unpleasant reality until the person is able to
face the facts. Defense mechanisms may provide temporary protection from problems
that might initially be too overwhelming. Defense mechanisms allow the person to develop
proper problem solving techniques without intense pressures. For example, the immediate
reaction of anyone being told of the death of a loved one is denial. The person simply
refuses to accept the situation as true. Such statements as “No! It’s not possible!” are often
used. Later the person will normally accept the fact over a period of time which gives the
individual a chance to recover.

Defense mechanisms, when used as a stopgap measure, may allow experimentation
with new kinds of behaviour and new roles. The demand for an immediate response to
a problem can lead to tension and poor solutions because of anxiety. Defense
mechanisms can rectify this with a relaxed, less pressurized approach to a situation. For
example, an unpleasant occurrence may cause a person to use rationalization to “save
face.” Once the person is alone and away from the pressures of the situation, they can
let down that guard and face the problem realistically. Defense mechanisms are an
important rescue system in a variety of crises.

158 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

aE
catharsis —
releasing
emotional
tensions by
openly discussing
problems

Oe

Nurturing Our Positive Emotions

What can we do to conquer negative emotions? How can we develop the inner strength
to enable us to meet all challenges in our lives? People need a balance of physical,
emotional, and mental support. Let’s look at some
useful ideas.

Developing Physical Strengths

An apple a day...

Cultivate and maintain good health habits. Mind and
body work as one. Getting enough rest and sleep,
balanced meals, and adequate exercise are all essential
elements. Keep your weight at a healthy level. Eat
breakfast. Avoid alcohol and cigarettes. Have regular
medical check ups. Avoid excessive sugar or fats.

a

Exercise is very important. Regular, moderate physical exercise is one of the best ways
to increase self-esteem, boost a person’s sense of power, and stimulate creativity. It can
make people more emotionally resilient. Positive health habits can increase life
expectancy by up to 15 years.

Developing Emotional Strengths

A friend in need...

Find a person you can confide in, and talk out your
troubles. The term catharsis means relieving
emotional tensions by verbalizing one’s feelings. By
sharing problems with others we might be
comforted in knowing that many others have had
the same problems and managed to conquer them.
We may be too emotionally involved in a situation
to think about it clearly, but friends can give us an
objective perspective. Circles of support will add
to your well being.

Reach out. In social relationships, learn to be
considerate and develop the quality of caring. Be
temperate in your criticism of others. Sincerity is
another valuable asset. Develop that intensity of
understanding and relating to other people, namely
empathy. Search for some worthwhile causes in
life and pursue them.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 159

Developing Mental Strengths
When the kettle boils...

Use constructive work or active leisure interests to release or reduce negative emotions
such as anger, hostility, and tension. We must admit to aggression and other related feelings
before these emotions can be channelled into positive projects.

Maintain a positive outlook. Look at the humourous side of a situation. When you are
confronted by too many demands, slow down, and take one problem at a time. This allows
you a better chance to remain calm and in control of anxiety. Realize that life is full of
changes and be ready to adapt to the changes you face. Be reasonable in setting levels for
achievement, neither too high (leading to frustration) or too low (leading to lack of interest).

Job satisfaction is extremely important for good mental and physical health. Some studies
suggest a close relationship between job enjoyment and the prediction of longevity. Work
and leisure should complement each other.

Relax, relax

Mediation is a remedy for stress practised by
many people. Meditation is a relaxation
technique which allows the person to get in
touch with their true inner nature. Relaxation
makes a person healthier, but there is a
spiritual aspect as well which helps the soul
as well as the body. Slow breathing has a
very calming effect. Another relaxation
technique is to imagine something that is
serene and peaceful. Mediation has been
shown to reduce blood pressure and ease
emotional tension.

Sometimes the best way to tackle problems
is to get away from them for a while enabling
you to get a fresh start when you return.
Keep smiling!

160 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Emotional Support From Pets

Companion animals contribute a great deal to the physical, mental, and emotional
health of their human friends. Long time animal owners know this fact. Now it has
been documented in many research studies as well. In our fast-paced, urban society,
people tend to be more isolated from extended family members than ever before. Pets
fill the void of isolation people experience more and more often. Pets offer
unconditional love. For people with mental health problems or delinquency problems,
pets provide the opportunity for these people to take responsibility to care for another
living creature.

Pets have a very calming influence on their human partners and have a positive effect
on people’s moods. Human-animal bonding reduces stress and anxiety, diffuses tension
in our lives, improves cardiovascular health, heightens one’s sense of self-esteem, and
increases one’s sense of security.

Pet therapy has been used extensively in a number of different institutions. Dogs and

cats visit various care facilities like hospital rooms of the terminally ill, extended care

institutions for the elderly, institutions for the mentally ill, and even a variety of places
of incarceration.

Pets appear to love one and all without
discrimination. They also display a deep
sense of trust in people which is very
therapeutic. Pets give people who are ill and
dependent a sense of dignity. Pets generate a
feeling of being needed which gives patients
the opportunity to practise their nurturing
skills. The overall health of some of the
fragile elderly has improved as they
anticipate regular visits from four-legged
friends. Some people who shrink from
communicating with human beings will
break that barrier and talk to their pet friends.
Pets act as an important social lubricant. In
some cases pets have proven to be more
effective in helping the ill than either drug
treatment or counselling.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 161

Calming Our Emotions Through Touch

In our society, people are out of touch with one of their most important senses, touch.
Touch has become forbidden in our minds because we weren’t touched a great deal by
our parents when we were children.
Now we have put up barriers against
touch. Usually touch has been
related to sex in some way and that
is why people are reluctant to reach
out to others with touch.

We can communicate many things
through touch that cannot be
conveyed by the spoken word.
Touch is our first sense as newborns.
Touch expresses many things—
relaxation, healing, friendship, and
love to name a few. When
therapeutic touch is used to heal
others, energy is transferred from the
hands of the practitioner to the
patient by moving the hands close to
the skin.

When people refrain from touch on a
long term basis, they are isolating
themselves from an important avenue of contact with others. We become lonely and
addicted to material things instead of what we can do for others. Physical isolation from
others can reduce our capacity for growth. If young animals are deprived of touch from
their parents, especially their mothers, they tend to grow up to be more violent and
aggressive.

Many people who yearn for touch hire professional massage therapists to provide that
physical contact. Massage reduces two stress hormones. For some people massage
relaxes them; others feel alive and energized after massage. Massage therapy helps
many ailments from migraines to muscle tension, depression, anxiety, and high blood
pressure. Some massage therapists say some of their most rewarding contact is with
lonely, elderly widows who crave a caring touch from someone.

Touch has played a key role in the miracle recovery of some hospital patients who were
seriously ill and sometimes even unconscious. The power of touch linked them to their
loved ones. Touch played a major role in bringing them back to health from that dark
abyss.

162 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Criminal Statistics

To many people our world is becoming more and more violent and riddled with crime as
each year passes. News on television and on the radio carry detailed stories of the latest
victims and their aggressors. The newspapers are full of ongoing incidents of crime. Our

conclusion is that crime is sweeping the country and increasing in epidemic proportions. But

is that perception accurate?

A General Social Survey conducted in 1988 and again in 1993 revealed some interesting
statistics describing crime in Canada. In the many different categories of crime there had

been little change at all in the rates. This included crimes such as sexual assault, assault,

robbery, break and enter, motor vehicle theft, theft of personal or household property,

and vandalism.
Some Crime Statistics For EDMONTON

Numeer oF 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993
OccurRENCES

Homicive 27 24 27 20 27 27
RoBBERY 1004. 1116 1223 1670 1692 1259
Sexual Retatep 1600 1495 1624 1832 1836 1608
AssAULT 5508 5818 6728 6835 6628 6312

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Section Three: Studying Behaviour

Where did many of the crimes take place? The statistics show a shift in the location of
crimes from private residences to public places. The amount of household victimization
decreased over the five year period between 1988 and 1993 for such crimes as break and
enters, motor vehicle thefts, and vandalism. Most offenders acted alone and without
weapons.

When you compare the 1988 to 1993 statistics to the more current figures below, you see
how the number of crimes have changed over time.

Homicipe 20 21 =+5.0% 90%
RoBBERY 1294 1269 -1.9% 35%
Sex-RELATED 962 873 -9.3% 56%
ASSAULT 5138 5518 = +7.4% 81%

* Fora detailed breakdown of these categories, please visit the Edmonton Police Service’s Internet

website at www.police.edmonton.ab.ca

Homicide refers to murder (first and second degree), manslaughter, criminal
negligence causing death.

Robbery includes extortion, extortion (libel), robbery with a firearm or offensive
weapon (Note: it does not include break and entry into homes, for
example.)

Sexual Related includes aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault with a weapon, anal
intercourse, bestiality, incest, sexual interference, invitation to sexual
touch, indecent acts, sexual exploitation, exposure to children under 14
years.

Assault means discharge weapon with intent, criminal negligence (causing injury),
aggravated assault, causing bodily harm (if a weapon is involved),
assaulting a police officer, or assaulting another officer, criminal

harassment.

Courtesy of the Edmonton City Police

164 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Are Crime Rates Increasing? a

Of course, a great deal of crime takes place that is not reported 4 ~
to the police for various reasons. In 1993, household break and | |

enters were the crimes most likely reported to the police and
sexual assaults were the least likely reported crimes. The only
crime that showed a substantial increase in reporting to police
was robbery. Sometimes crimes are not reported because they
are perceived to be too minor, victims feel the police could do
nothing about it anyway, or in some cases there may be a fear of
revenge, or deep feelings of shame. Half of the people in
Canada reported that they keep their doors locked at all times,
even when they are at home. About two-thirds of Canadians say
they still feel safe walking in their own neighbourhoods at night,
but each year people are reporting more concerns about their safety.

With these statistics in mind, why do people have the perception that crime rates are
increasing dramatically? An increase in crime statistics makes the news because the media
finds information such as that gains attention from the public. When crime rates tend to
remain stable or even decrease slightly, that is considered a bit boring. People tend to focus
on information that is dramatic, vivid, intense, and somewhat frightening.

People are most concerned with situations where they will become victims of violent crimes.
Statistics such as those you examined for the city of Edmonton indicate that Canadians are
not at a higher risk of this happening today than they were five years earlier.

The Psychology of Victimization

At some time in your life you face the possibility of becoming a victim of some type of
crime. A great deal of time is devoted to studying criminals. What is the personal, emotional
impact of becoming a victim?

It is relatively common now for people who have been victims of crime (or in the case of
murder, the surviving relatives) to make victim impact statements to the court during the
trial of the offender. A victim impact statement is simply a paragraph or two about how the
victims have been personally affected by the crime. It is saying, “Yesterday I was a normal
member of society. Because of the crime, my life has changed in the following way...” Itis
important for victims to be heard and to know that they have had the opportunity to “have
their say” in public. They are the innocent victims and in many cases their lives have been
irrevocably altered by the act of crime. Simply making a statement can’t undo the terrible
damage that has been done to these victims. But in the process of voicing their hurt, victims
experience healing and their faith in the process of justice is restored somewhat.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 165

The feelings experienced by the victim of a crime cover a broad range of reactions
depending on the serious nature of the crime and whether the perpetrator of the criminal act
was known to them or a stranger. Victim trauma syndrome is the intense reaction that is
experienced resulting from the abuse a person suffers during a crime. Many people report
they feel “violated” in some way. They feel singled out, punished, isolated, unclean, and
damaged either physically or psychologically. The question that keeps coming back to their
mind is, “Why me?” An overwhelming sense of fear and insecurity may develop often
leading to nightmares. A person may experience fatigue, disturbances in sleep patterns,
tension headaches, intense guilt, and self-blame. Accompanying those ailments are an
overpowering fear of physical violence and death. It is little wonder that the justice system
gives victims a chance to have their say in court. This procedure returns to victims a little
sense of power and control in their lives that was taken away when the crime was
committed.

Violence In The Home

Violence is physically and psychologically damaging when it occurs. When the home
becomes a place of violence, the impact can be crippling for family members. The home is
our basic source of security enabling us to grow and take a position as a productive
member of society. When violence occurs in the home, growth and development are no
longer the focus; the family member or members are simply interested in survival.

When violence occurs in the home, the father or father figure is the perpetrator in many
cases. However, sometimes the wife and mother is the abuser which seems to occur with
increasing frequency. She may abuse both her children and her husband. Men who are
abused by their wives are usually silent about the violence that is aimed at them. They feel
ashamed that they are being terrorized by a woman because it destroys their masculine
image.

166 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Let’s look at the more common case of the husband dominating his wife with physical
or psychological violence. Sometimes only the wife is abused in the initial stages, but
later on the children may become subject to abuse as well. Some wives tolerate years of
abuse, but when the children also become victims, they realize they must take action.

Vast amounts of money from both the government and private donations are poured into the
building and maintenance of women’s shelters where women and their children can find a
safe haven if they choose to run away from an abusive husband and father. These men see
women as their property to do with as they wish instead of equal marriage partners. The
men feel a deep urge to control their wives and use violence to accomplish this goal. It may
happen more often when women become independent and enter the work force. Some men
may feel frustrated for one reason or another and have not learned proper anger
management. A high portion of battering men come from homes where their fathers beat
their mothers.

Women have reported a wide range of injuries at the hands of their partners. Some include
beating, choking, slapping, being thrown around, assault with a weapon, and suffering many
degrading sexual indignities. They have had broken bones, bruises to all parts of their
bodies, cuts, black eyes and other injuries to the face. Often the control and the violence
begins with minor things like a slap or a punch and eventually the cycle of violence escalates
and becomes more brutal and life threatening. Some women say they have been abused
even while they are pregnant. Many wives report that as the constant terror continues, they
begin playing a number of “mind games” to avoid injury. They learn to read their husband’s
moods and stay out of their way. They learn to obey his every command like a small child
so they will not antagonize him when he is in a bad mood. These women usually have a very
low self-esteem. They feel stupid and unworthy. Some may even believe that they are “bad”
in some way and deserve this kind of treatment.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 167

It is important for people to appear “normal” to the outside world. Battered families feel
ashamed of the terror they experience. Family members who are abused go to great lengths
to give the semblance of a normal family to their friends and community. Women hide their
bruised faces with makeup and dark sunglasses. They make excuses for what happened
by saying they have been clumsy and injured themselves. They wear long-sleeved
clothing to hide bruises on their arms. Alcohol abuse is often a great factor in setting off
an abusive rage. Afterwards the husband may shower his wife with gifts, cry, say he is
sorry and it will never happen again, and beg her forgiveness. Unless he has had some
intervention counselling, these feelings of remorse are only temporary until the next
beating episode occurs.

After many years of injuries, women develop the battered wife syndrome. In this very
delicate mental state, a woman has intense fear for her safety and perhaps her life every
waking moment. Overpowering fear may eventually push her to the brink and she may take
drastic action—killing him before she fears he will kill her. The battered wife syndrome has
been successfully used by some lawyers defending their female clients when these women
have finally murdered their male partners. One report brings forward the chilling statistic that
women are most likely to be killed by people they have formed a relationship with (less than
one tenth are killed by strangers). Women are more likely to be killed in their own homes
more than anywhere else.

One solution for reducing the violence against women in the home is to give more social and
economic support to women in order to reduce their dependency on the men who abuse
them. At one time a woman had to lay charges against her husband herself when abuse
occurred. Many women were terrified to do that for fear that the husband would seek a
vicious form of revenge. Now the police will automatically take action on her behalf and will
lay an assault charge on the abusive spouse. It is easier to avoid entering an abusive
relationship than to escape once you are involved. Therefore the following article should be
read very carefully.

168 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

OST SL “PHY ‘Uoluowpy

‘Tere xog “idaq suouvjay
Anunuuoy ‘pousnor ayy 0/9
SMaPUDT UUY O} aflam ADU S4apDay
“SOATT JTOY) SARS P[NOD

q ‘Apuey Joquinu suoyd ay) doay pue
OUI] JOY DDUD[OIA SNHSOWOP JO Jo}[oYs
$,USWIOM JSoreOU OY} JNO Yooyo

TTA uUINTOO s,Aepo} UT SoATasUTay)
298 OYM UdUTOM ay) adoy T

‘aArosop Kay} ey

SI JUOWJVON) DAISNGe Jey) DADI[AG

0} apeur usaq aaey Aoy], Wey) 0} INO
W syutod suoeulos [HUN pasnge sutaq
are Ady} LY) 9ZIPBOI JOU OP USWIOM.
OWOS JNg ‘dAdI[9q 0} INIIJIP 9q

KRU STU], “one, JUeyodun ATouIanNxo
ue JOJ NOK yuRY, :u0s9IO vag,

“IO ‘puepiog

— ‘days Isi1j oy} SI suSIs SurueM oy}
SUIAJNUAPI puL ‘adUaTOIA JO BTID
ay) year 0} SkVM [RIBAS ore BIO],
‘suondo Ajoyes pue

yoddns yim popraoid og [[IM ays
“Suruaddey st yyM auosUtOs [][9) pue
OUT] SISLIO S,UStIOM JSaTeaU aU} [Teo

Pinoys Kepo} uunjos oy) ur Jjasioy
soos oym uvuOM AUY ‘ouoYdetor

ay) se asojo se st djay wou [aL
“suSIs Sururem oy) peal oO}

MOY MOUY 0} pasu Lay) ‘saary Jay) UT
QUIT] SUOS 18 pard}}eq aq [TM UOUIOM,
uRoLIOUIYy YON I] Jo Jyey Ayreou
asnedeg “spudry Jo ‘syuared ‘sayep
‘soyeul — ououe WO INOIARYaq
qusTorA Jdos9e 0} dARY 1,UOP

Kay) ssopeas nof 19} asevoyd ‘uuy
(‘Sunooys

Jo ‘Surqqeis “Suryoyo 0} oyeyeose
Ajiseo ues mnoravyaq Jo odAq sty,
“noA syory Jo sdejs ‘soaoys ‘soysnd
“qyeM B JsuIeSe Jo UMOP NOK spfoH)
“UOUINSIe ue BULINP 9dIOJ SOS. “ET
(UaIpIyd MOA JO NOK ye JO Jeu
syoalgo smo) ‘S}STy WLM o[qQe} OY)
uo syeaq ‘suorssassod mod syeorg)
‘sjoafqo SuryLs Jo Suryeelg “Z]
(,.yoou NOK Yeorq

ILL, 40 MOK [IPI [L.L, «N04 deys

ILL, ‘SAvg) oougfora Jo swworyL, “TT
(.(28pe

ay) Joao poysnd,, useq Surry

JOJ SOSNdX9 Jo IST] B SBY INQ SIOyIO WY,
se) ‘Surrayeq Jo Aroysty seg ‘OT

Coantund pure Arsue
oyNUIUT }XOU OY) “SUTAOT OyNUTUT
auo — INOLARYeaq e[qQuIdIposdun pue
SSUIMS POOU Usppns) ‘AjTeUOssod
opsH IN pur Of Id “6
(‘dagqs 0] 08 nok
39] 1,Us20p JO NOK asnqe A]yTeqQIOA
0} dn nod soyem ‘no soyerprumny,
pure soperZop ‘s8urup [nny
pur Janio skeg) ‘asnge [eq °8
Cpem
JO [[E ore nos uaYyM xos purutop
Jo Surdagjs ore nNoA uayM Nok YM
xos Suravy yeys Key *xos Surmp
noX poy pue uMop nod Mory) ARYA)
“xOS UL 9dIOJ Joasn ,[NJAeTg,,  “L

ddIAPV

sispue’y
uuy

(sjeutue pure uerpyryo

ny Jospue aseo} Avur ‘SuLoyns
pue ured s10y) 0) sAnIsuosuy)
“UdIPTIYS JO syeumtue 0} AyanID “9
(‘o1B9 pyTyd Jo saroya

YUM dpoy 01 poyse Surg ‘pury

Aue JO WISIOILIO ‘OUITIOAO YIOM

0} poyse Sutaq se yons ‘ary Ayrep

Jo wed & are yey) sooueAouur fq
yosdn Apiseq) ‘AyanisuasiodAY *¢
(cyney mo4,, st SuryAr9Ae

— sjorenb Ayrurey ‘uowAo;dursuy)
“sulaTqoud sty 10J Joyo souR[gG =p

(30M

ye son8eajjoo pur syed ouoydajay

se yons saomosa sarioddns |e
Woy JJO NOK synD) ‘uoNRJOsT “¢

(‘suors1sop

[euosiod oye nod ,.8urdjoy,,

UO SjsTsUI puke AoUOUI INoA pue

sSulo3 pue ssumuod NOK sjomUOD)
“Moraryog SuljonUuoD 7

“A[rurey pue spuoLy ‘s1oyI0M

-09 YIM OUT} INO Jo ATSnopRop “|

“Taroyeg (TeNjde IO) yeTUa}od
B SLOJEP JO Oe B JL OUTULIA}Op

uoWOM djay 0} speusis SuruIeA Jo SI]

stu} quud aseo[g :sopue’y uuy 1vaq

QOUDTOIA JO BOAO OY} PIOAR UDUIOM yoy ABUT SUSIS SUTUIEM Ud9}ITY J,

S$.19.19]JBQ JSUIBSE JSITYIOY.)

PO6L ‘€ Jaquiadag ‘Avpanyes ‘euInof vojuowpy ayt Qa

169

Section Three: Studying Behaviour

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Effects Of Violence In The Media

Violence is invited into our homes on a daily basis through the media of television. Of course
violence is referred to in other media as well (radio and newspapers), but the effects of
violence through television are by far the most dramatic and negative. How bad is the
influence of violence on television? Is it an overreaction? Let’s look at a few statistics.

By the time the average young
person has reached the teen years,
he/she has been exposed to a
quarter of a million acts of violence
on TV.

Each evening an average of six or
seven acts of violence and two
homicides appear during prime
time viewing.

Two types of programs that the average person may believe to be harmless can, in fact, be
the worst offenders for violence. One is cartoons where characters shower each other with
repeated acts of aggression, in an attempt to portray comedy. A “real person” would be
dead or seriously injured by any one of these behaviours, but the cartoon characters get up,
brush themselves off, and continue. This may give small children the idea that they can hit
their brothers or sisters on the head with something, and there won’t be serious
consequences.

The other type of television program that can have quite a negative impact on viewers is the
news. News programs can be upsetting because we realize these events have actually
happened. When viewers see the negative coverage condensed into a one hour or half hour
news broadcast, they may conclude that there is more violence than there actually is.

When people are immersed in scenes of violence on television, 95% of the studies affirm
that a person’s attitudes, values, and often their behaviour will be affected. In other words,
there is a correlation or a connection between seeing violence and aggressive behaviour.
Exposure to violence in the media desensitizes people. Once desensitized to violence,
people are more likely to become tolerant of violence in the real world. In some cases,
people are no longer hesitant to use violence against others.

170 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Studies confirm that children become very aggressive in their behaviour after watching
a violent episode on TV. Studies show that television violence has more of an effect on
children who are academically low achievers and on those who are naturally aggressive. To
predict violent behaviour in adults, look at violent behaviour in children. One of the main
predictors of adult criminality is early exposure to television violence.

What can be done to reduce the amount of violent programming on television? If the public
does not watch this type of program, it will quickly disappear because television producers
and distributors are very sensitive to their ratings. There are other positive ways that parents
can control their children’s experience with television material. First, children are highly
influenced by their parents’ viewing habits especially during the younger years of their lives.
Parents can set limits on the types of shows their children are allowed to watch. Parents can
watch programs with their children. They can discuss and challenge television so that
children will learn to develop critical and analytical skills as viewers.

Youth Crime And The Young Offenders’ Act

In recent years, many people across Canada have voiced extreme displeasure with our
current Young Offenders’ Act. They have written letters to the editors of newspapers,
phoned in to talk shows to complain, and have signed petitions by the thousands asking for
changes.

Most people have a perception of the average criminal to be an adult male. But when a
young person commits a violent crime, that notion is shattered. It is upsetting to learn that a
young person is responsible for such destructive behaviour. When young Canadians commit
homicide, the targets for their vengeance are: parents (15% of the time), other family
members (20%), total strangers (30%), and friends and acquaintances (35%). If they
commit homicide, younger children are more likely to kill family members. Most frequently,
youth homicides involve males killing other males. Female killers are responsible for only
about 10% of the youth homicides.

How serious is youth crime? Earlier in this lesson you learned how the media can deeply
affect our perceptions about a situation. Let’s look at some statistics on youth crime.

Rates of Youth (Age 12-17) Homicide, Canada: 1986-1997

wa WA

0.50

Rate per 100,000 Population

1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 171

We do know that vandalism and theft have increased somewhat. There seems to be an
increasing trend in the incidents of gang activity and gang violence. Teenage assaults are
carried out for a variety of reasons: to steal special kinds of clothing, for initiation into a
gang, and to dominate weaker peers. Extortion of money or goods occurs when a stronger
person intimidates a weaker one to meet certain demands in order to avoid a robbery or
beating. Another slang name for this activity is “taxing”. Sometimes swarmings occur
whereby a young person is surrounded by a gang of teenagers and is assaulted or robbed in
a flurry of violence. Often the victim is silenced by the fact that the assault was perpetrated
by a gang in their immediate area who could attack once again if the gang’s identity is
revealed.

What factors have caused the public to believe that youth crime is out of control in Canada?
Schools and communities have developed a Zero Tolerance Policy regarding altercations
between young people. In the past, a school yard fight would have been resolved between
school administration, parents, the students involved, and maybe the police. With a zero
tolerance policy toward aggressive or violent behaviour, many of these incidents now come
before the courts even when assaults are relatively minor in nature.

172 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Many people blame the wording and enforcement of the Young Offenders Act (YOA)
as the cause of many of the problems with delinquent young people. What are some of
the reasons? The Young Offenders Act was passed in 1984. It governs young people
involved in criminal activity between the ages of 12 and 18 years of age. A child under
12 years is not considered criminally responsible for his/her actions. The YOA specifies
much shorter terms for juvenile offenders. For example, three years is the maximum
sentence a young person receives for the more serious crimes of aggravated assault and
murder. The names and photographs of young offenders cannot be published or made
know to the public. Although the reasons behind these rules might be worthy, they can
lead to serious problems. For example, the police find it difficult to apprehend
dangerous young offenders because their identities cannot be made known to the
public. Therefore it is not possible for the public to provide tips leading to an arrest.
Also, many children under 12 are used by older criminals to commit crimes or conceal
evidence because these children have immunity from being convicted.

What are some of the reasons behind youth crime?
Family problems are at the top of the list. Some
children are abused, there are serious conflicts in
the home, and parents themselves might be
involved in criminal activities. Some families live in | \
crippling conditions of poverty. Authority of the )
parents has been seriously undermined in some

cases. Some young criminals come from one A a
parent homes. The parent in charge is too \
overwhelmed by many other concerns including | | \
economic ones to give the children the attention 1

they need. One sociologist boldly stated that the |
single most effective thing to do to reduce the
crime rate would be to put money into programs |
that would reduce the number of pregnant teens

who are not prepared for the responsibility of D | 1
child-rearing.

Besides making changes in the home life of disadvantaged youngsters, school problems can
contribute to criminal tendencies. A child who faces continual failure and conflict in the
school may drift into a life of crime. A young person’s drug or alcohol abuse with delinquent
friends may be quite innocent at first, but it can lead to more serious types of antisocial
behaviour and eventually into the world of crime.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 173

Kleptomania

The deep-seated urge to steal things is known as kleptomania. The kleptomaniac may
steal from retail stores or even items from the homes of friends and acquaintances. Most
Kleptomaniacs are women (up to 90%), but young boys and young men may also be
involved.

What are some of the unique features of kleptomania? First, stealing does not occur
because the person needs the item and does not have the money to buy it. The
Kleptomaniac often comes from financially comfortable families. They usually don’t use the
items they steal but just accumulate them in a collection, or they may even throw the articles
away. They may steal the same kind of article over and over.

What are some of the reasons for kleptomania? The emotions that arise during the acts of
theft are very similar to those of sexual excitement. There is a lot of danger associated with
the act of stealing which is illegal. The kleptomaniac associates this tension with sexual
excitement and gratification.

On the other hand, some kleptomaniacs are not stimulated in a sexual way by stealing items.
In these cases motivation may come from lack of emotional warmth during childhood or
from harsh treatment by parents or guardians. These kleptomaniacs steal for revenge against
people who are linked to parental authority like store owners or the police.

It has been noted that a female
Kleptomaniac’s urge to steal is often strongest
during her menstrual period possibly due to
the fact that emotional control is weakest at
this time because of hormonal changes. (This
is simply an observation, not an excuse.)

The kleptomaniac does not plan in advance to
steal something. Usually at an opportune time,
the person has an overpowering impulse to
take an item. Unsuccessfully they try to talk
themselves out of doing this deed and
eventually take the item. Once they have
stolen, they are overcome by tremendous
feelings of guilt, humiliation, and remorse.
They are seized by the need for punishment
which may explain why they continue to steal
inan unskillful manner until they are caught.

174 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Pyromania

The compulsive urge to set fires is known as pyromania. The pyromaniac should not be
confused with the arsonist whose goal in starting a fire is tied with some type of financial gain
like collecting insurance money or destroying a business that is not profitable. But please be
aware that anyone who intentionally or recklessly starts a fire will be charged with arson.
Most fires are set for fraudulent reasons (to collect insurance money). Some fires are started
to cover up acrime like homicide or theft; the fire damages the evidence. Then there are the
pyromaniacs which we will discuss now.

What are some of the reasons behind the pyromaniac’s dangerous and destructive
behaviours? First, some want to show a defiant response to authority. They want to show
rebellion against the law and they view the police as authority figures like their fathers for
example. A second reason is linked to hostility and aggression stemming from rejection in
childhood. By setting fires which endanger lives and property, the pyromaniac is satisfying
aggressive, destructive urges that were unresolved from childhood. The pyromaniac delights
in setting a fire because it is a very powerful agent of destruction with which he can identify.
The third motive is linked to sexual excitement and sexual conflict. The person may
associate fire with sexual stimulation and expression. Many words in our language connect
fire and sexual excitement. For example: “flames of passion’, “playing with fire” (when you
willingly go into a sexually dangerous situation), “being on fire” with sexual arousal, feeling
“hot” or excited about someone.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 175

All of the activities surrounding a fire are dangerous and exciting which adds to the
fascination. A fire generates power, heat, unpredictability, spontaneity, and brilliant flashes of
light. In addition, there is noise and chaos from the fire itself and from people trying to
control the fire.

Pyromaniacs feel compelled to watch the fires they start and their sexual excitement builds
until they reach a point of gratification. Once that has passed, they may experience intense
feelings of guilt.

Almost every year in the driest season of September, fires race through parts of California.
They destroy homes and the nearby environment. Some of these fires kill people and may
cause animals and family pets to perish if they cannot be rescued in time. Costs are
astronomical. Sometimes natural combustion or lightning is the culprit; sometimes it is a local
pyromaniac.

The Psychopath

Psychopaths may be described as individuals who continually participate in antisocial acts.
They feel no guilt, remorse, or shame for their wrongdoings. They have a careless disregard
for the rights of others. Psychopaths are devoid of any real feelings and values. They have
no true emotions. They are immune to anxiety or fear and therefore they aren’t worried
about punishment or obeying rules. A psychopath can destroy a colleague, a neighbour, a
member of the family without so much as a backward glance or a flicker of guilt. They have
no genuine loyalties. They have one focus: to be winners themselves even if it is at the
expense of someone else. The “genuine” psychopath can use these qualities to be a sharp
and ruthless business person.

Psychopaths appear incapable of either designing or following a life plan with worthwhile
goals. They may be moved to antisocial behaviour without warning and become suddenly
aggressive or violent without provocation or reason. Unfortunately, psychopaths have
developed no sound insights to account for their behaviour so self-improvement can be a
lengthy and difficult process. Basically, they don’t have the will to change or improve.

By now you are probably curious to know how or why a person feels this way. Earlier in
this course you studied Freud and the three parts of the personality—the id, the ego, and
the superego or the conscience. The conscience gives us inner moral principles and a sense
of right and wrong. The psychopath has no conscience. If you asked a psychopath: is
this situation right or wrong, good or bad, they can recite the correct answer. The problem
is they have no commitment to follow through and behave in the correct manner.

176 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

In summary, these characteristics sum up the psychopath: intelligent, outwardly
charming, vain, impulsive, deceptive, unreliable, callous, insincere, egocentric,
emotionally undeveloped, demanding of immediate need satisfaction, and unresponsive
to interpersonal relationships. They are skilled liars. They are social predators doing
whatever they want to whoever they can trick or control.

Approximately 1% of the population is psychopathic. The observation—once a
psychopath, always a psychopath is likely true. What are some reasons for the
psychopathic misfit? Psychopathy is not a type of mental illness characterized by the onset
of symptoms sometime during one’s life. Many experts now believe that psychopaths are
born, they are not formed from negative elements in their upbringing. Many psychopaths
come from normal loving homes; they are not always the victims of abuse. One theory
suggests that in the psychopath’s formative years, the mechanism which develops the
conscience is faulty. In the shaping of a conscience, the conditioning process involves the
pairing of a stimulus (punishment) with a response (fear, anxiety, guilt). When a person
matures, threats are not necessary to convince the normal person to refrain from antisocial
behaviour; they have become self-disciplined. In the case of the psychopath, the
socialization process just described has been severely interrupted.

Another theory states the origin of the psychopathic personality can be explained by the
parental rejection hypothesis. Some parents make no secret of the fact that they didn’t
want a child in the first place. These unwanted children may be frequently abused by the
parents. Psychopaths are alienated from parents with serious consequences:

¢ they disregard social standards and values

¢ they disrespect authority in general which they view as an extension of parental
influence

* they do not develop empathy or emotional identification with others

* they learn to hate instead of love

There are psychopathic children. Even some preschoolers can show these deviant
characteristics: lack of empathy, fearlessness, being highly active, reacting to others as if they
have no feelings, and not being concerned with respect to other people.

Why is the psychopath so potentially dangerous? Without a conscience, psychopaths are
capable of committing any crime from robbery to murder. Psychopaths can destroy people
they have close relationships with by ruining them financially or tearing them apart
psychologically and emotionally. When people have no concern for their fellow human
beings, then they are indeed seriously crippled in the area of interpersonal relationships.
They don’t see themselves as being abnormal. They aren’t committed to counselling or
therapy. They are not interested in rehabilitation.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 177

Sexual Assault

What is sexual assault? Sometimes this crime appears under the heading of rape as well.
It is a deliberate, violent act of sexual degradation. Sometimes sexual intercourse occurs
against a person’s will (with or without injury to the victim). Sometimes it involves touching,
or fondling of a person’s private body parts without their permission. Sexual assault
sometimes includes other forms of violence against the person that occur in conjunction with
the sexual encounter such as beating or slashing, inflicted with or without weapons.

What causes a person to commit sexual assault? Intimidation and fear are used to control
and overpower someone against their will. The rapist has deep feelings of inadequacy which
leads to violence. Rape makes these kind of men feel superior, sexually dominant, and
masculine by use of aggression. The act of rape involves the primary wish to express anger
and rage; seeking sexual gratification is a secondary motive. The rapist ambiguously views
his victim as both a desired person and a despised one. Rape is most commonly a
transgression by men against women, although homosexual rape occurs too. (The topic of
sexual abuse of children was addressed earlier in this lesson.)

Most rapes are planned in advance either by the lone rapist or a gang. Sometimes a
particular victim may be selected prior to the act. Or the idea to rape may be present, and
the selection of a victim is left to chance when someone appears in the wrong spot at an
opportune time for the assailant.

The risk of sexual assault takes place in a variety of situations. Unfortunately women are
more at risk to sexual assault from people they know than from total strangers. Date rape is
one type of assault that is relatively easy for the aggressor because the woman assumes she
is ina safe, friendly, and trusting relationship. Women who are separated or divorced from
their spouses may be under continued risk of sexual assault from former partners in
some circumstances. Gradually the law is recognizing that sexual assault may also
occur in a marriage where one spouse controls the other sexually and may use some
measure of force for sexual gratification.

178 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

The risk of sexual assault takes place in a variety of locations as well. Many rapes are
committed when young people hitchhike. About half the sexual assaults occur in a private
place such as the victim’s home, the perpetrator’s home, or in a vehicle.

Unlike victims of other crimes, the issue of resistance or lack of consent is very important
and must be proven to the authorities by the rape victim. A common myth that still persists
regarding rape is that the victim “was asking for it”. Some people hold the stereotype that
the “victim” was an attractive young lady wearing provocative clothing. The facts are quite
different. It is horrifying to know that the youngest known rape victim was a tiny infant and
the oldest recorded rape victim was women in her nineties.

The possibility of being sexually assaulted is a threat to anyone. It means that certain
freedoms of independence cannot be taken for granted. To reduce the threat of rape, a
woman is generally encouraged to conceal her personal identity (on mailboxes, apartment
doors, and telephones) if living alone .

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 179

Something Extra — Cults

The word “cult” denotes mystery, danger, and power. Most people feel a tinge of fear;
others may decide that for all of those reasons cults must be exciting. Originally the word
cult meant strict devotion to a person or thing. That idea sounds innocent enough, doesn’t
it? But a more precise idea of a cult is a group that “uses” and controls its members in ways
that demand strict adherence to the loyalty of the group often with harmful emotional,
psychological, and financial consequences to the cult member.

Cults focus on various themes such as
religion, politics, self-improvement,
and marketing (or moneymaking
projects). Cults purport that they are
the only way to salvation or the only
way to save the world. Many
religious cults are based on Christian
teachings, but the leader (pastor)
assumes dictatorial power unlike a
“normal” church where the pastor and
congregation work together. A white
supremist organization would be an
example of a political cult.
Therapeutic or self-improvement cults
focus on the person’s desire for positive changes. The cult may advertise that they have
found new revolutionary methods or exciting new breakthroughs to reach this goal.
Marketing cults usually target young people who are struggling to find employment. They
may answer newspaper ads that promise challenging, exciting jobs with unbelievable
financial rewards. In the end, these new recruits sell door-to-door or become street
peddlers for little monetary returns.

What are some common characteristics of a cult that distinguish them from ordinary groups?
(Here are a few of the many characteristics.)

« First, they have a charismatic leader, someone who is dynamic, with a sparkling,
magnetic personality. All successful groups require good leaders, but the cult leader
seems to have an unusual degree of power and charm over the members.

¢ Second, although the cult may list idealistic goals, the real reason for its existence is
money, sex, and/or power.

¢ Third, the techniques the cult uses to recruit new members are deceptive so the
person will be drawn into the group without being aware of the full implications of
their decision.

180 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

¢ Fourth, the cult influences and bends the thinking of the individual similar to mind
control activities, which means the cult directs and manipulates the person’s ideas to
suit the objectives of the cult. This is accomplished by subconsciously promoting the
message of the cult in a carefully controlled way, over a period of time. The end result
is that members become completely controlled by the leader. The cult’s method for
recruiting new members and indoctrinating them follows a skillful, well planned
program.

¢ Fifth, after a member has been indoctrinated, physical control and even violence is
used to keep the person “‘in line”. Peer pressure, threats and sometimes physical
confinement are used to maintain strict control and to keep the members from leaving.

¢ Finally, to strengthen the control the cult has over the individual, members are
separated from outside friends and especially their families. While the person is being
isolated from their family, they are being showered with affection and attention from
cult members.

Are cults present right here in Alberta? Yes, they may be found in both urban and rural areas
of the province. Where do many of these cults recruit new members? University campuses
are one fertile area for cults to attract new members. (Remember that is only one area for
recruitment.) The idea of cults soliciting members at a place of higher learning is inconsistent
with the image of a cult member as being a gullible, simple-minded person. In fact, many cult
members are very intelligent people, but in the first few months of university life, a person
may feel vulnerable and alone. These students may be brand new to the city and are
experiencing a “down” period in their lives. Cults don’t appeal to the intelligence of the
individual but rather to their emotional void at the time. The cult uses friendship as the initial
bait to attract new recruits. The new university student may be invited to a “gathering”
where they meet friendly and caring cult members. At that point the process of gradually
getting more and more of a commitment from the person begins in earnest.

Some people confuse cults with Satanism (a belief in the devil) or involvement with witches
(wicca, which is paganism or the belief that God exists in everything). Both Satanism and
witchcraft are part of the occult or supernatural.

Young people in their early teens may join a Satanic group for self-gratification or to attain
power over others. Like cult members, occult members are usually very intelligent people,
but are underachievers in what they try to accomplish. People involved in occult groups
usually dabble in the activities for a few years, grow out of it, and move on to more normal
interests. That might make their temporary involvement in something like Satanism seem
innocuous. The truth is, some people get very emotionally dependent on Satanic groups.
Tragically, some individuals may harm themselves physically and may even go as far as
committing suicide.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 181

Suppose you suspect someone close to you is involved in a cult. What can you do to
make them see the error of such a choice? It is not helpful to begin with direct
confrontation for at least two reasons. First it would cause your loved one to take
offense to your accusations that they have been duped. Secondly, acting openly and
boldly may set up a psychological tug-of-war with the well organized, sophisticated
controls of the cult who will do whatever is in their power to “save” this individual for
the cult. So what can you do? Research the cult in question so that you know what it’s
all about and can plan intelligent counter moves. Then fight fire with fire. If the cult
attracted the member with warmth and friendship, do the same. Be careful not to
condone your loved one’s involvement in the cult. Establish a close relationship with
them, and reminisce about “old times” you had together. Then gradually, step-by-step,
get the person to question the promises and the rituals that the cult enforces. Be careful
about becoming a casualty yourself—be firmly anchored in your own support
mechanism so you can be strong for both yourself and your cult-entangled friend or
family member.

Remember, cults can take many forms, styles, and philosophies. Cults are not illegal but they
are often involved in illegal activities. Ultimately cults will destroy your individuality. Should
you become a cult member, you will lose the power to think for yourself, grow as an
individual, and be your own person. You will be financially drained. Your mind will be empty
of those special qualities that allow you to explore life on your own terms and take whatever
pathways you choose. You may enter these groups believing that you can remain on the
fringe and maintain your independence, but cult philosophy is wise and cunning in either
unconsciously drawing total commitment from you, or casting you aside if you cannot be
melded to their ways which means you are no longer useful to them.

We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Detective Hugh Frey of
the Edmonton City Police in preparing material for this section.

Optional Reading — Criminal Profiles: Analyzing Homicides

When a homicide occurs, police investigators must do a psychological analysis of the
darkest side of human behaviour. For all normal human beings, the topic of murder is
distasteful, but it is also fascinating to discover how this frightening aspect of human
behaviour is analyzed in the absence of actual witnesses. Some of you may not want to read
or contemplate this topic. Therefore the final section of this lesson is completely optional.

The most dramatic and sensational of all crimes is murder. At first one might think that
murder is murder, but there are over fifteen different categories of homicide. Let’s name a
few of them: contract killing, gang-motivated, kidnap murder, product tampering
homicide, drug murder, insurance inheritance-related homicide, felony murder (property
crime is the motive), personal cause homicide (for example domestic homicide),

182 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

erotomania (for example murder involving a fantasy based on romantic love), revenge
killing, argument/conflict murder, authority killing (for example the dismissed employee
believes they have been wronged by the authority figure), extremist homicide for
political or religious reasons, hostage murder, sexual homicide, group cause homicide
(for example a cult murder), and mercy homicide (for example the case of a person
helping a terminally ill person to die). Mass murder involves the homicides of more than
three people. A spree murder involves a continual murder that occurs between more
than two locations. Serial murders mean separate homicides by the same person over a
period of time.

In the absence of witnesses to the homicide, police investigators face an extremely difficult
task because the victim is deceased and cannot provide information. In almost all cases, the
offenders will not be helpful in supplying evidence damaging to themselves. So investigators
must study other data to piece together the story of the tragedy. The investigation of a
homicide studies three important elements: background of the victim, an analysis of the
crime scene, and the nature of the exchange between the criminal and the victim. The first
two elements are called primary sources of physical evidence. Evidence is called the silent
witness because it can be used to reveal who the offender is and what the motive was.
Secondary sources of evidence would be information that is recovered from the offender’s
residence. Forensic analysis is conducted on hair, hair fibres, blood, saliva, and semen.

It may seem unusual to begin the investigation by taking a close look at the victims because
they are the innocent party, but answering questions about this individual may lead to the
motive which in turn will lead to the offender. Victimology is victim history which may
explain why a particular person was targeted for the murder. Was the victim known to the
offender? This in-depth information will be considered pertinent in victimology:
employment, income, lifestyle, marital status, reputation, personality, family, friends,
drug/alcohol use, leisure activity, dating habits, and transportation commonly used by
this person.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 1835

Once the victim has been carefully analyzed, the investigator collects data known as
crime scene indicators. How many crime scenes are involved? (Was the body found at
the scene of the homicide?) Did the crime occur indoors or outdoors? Did it occur
during the day or night? Did the crime take place in a busy public area or in a secluded
spot? Can it be predicted how long the offender stayed at the homicide scene? Did the
offender feel comfortable committing the offense in that location? How many offenders
were there? Was the crime scene organized or disorganized indicating if the murder was
premeditated and also reflecting the offender’s level of criminal sophistication. Was the
weapon brought to the crime scene or was it a nearby object? Was the weapon present
at the crime scene after the murder? Was the body openly displayed or was an attempt
made to conceal it? Was the body intentionally arranged in a certain way or left ina
degrading position? Were personal belongings taken from the victim as a kind of
“souvenir” for the offender? What other objects might be missing from the crime scene?

Eventually police investigators might make a series of educated guesses about the offender,
predicting age, racial background, residency, employment or skills, home life, social skills,
and general personality. To be successful, police investigators must put as many pieces of
the puzzle together as possible. The final piece is the offender. Eventually this person will be
caught. Will it be sooner or later?

Summary

This lesson has given us the opportunity to explore a wide array of emotions to give us a
better understanding of this special essence we have as human beings. Many of the
emotions featured have been the more negative ones. We hope that has not been
depressing. By openly discussing negative emotions, we hope to give you a better
perspective of them, so that you can remain in control. You were also given some insights
into the violent, strange, and destructive side of human nature by studying some of the
elements of crime in our society. Her is a quick review of some of the key elements.

To summarize:

¢ Aggression is one emotion that exerts a powerful influence.

¢ Somewhat related to aggression is assertiveness which means resolving
problems from a win-win position.

* Some people believe in the theory that aggression is inherited as one of our
instincts for survival; others believe that aggression is a learned behaviour and
is sparked by frustrating elements in our environment.

¢ Ahighly condemned form of aggression in our society is child abuse. Child
abusers were often abused themselves as children. Child abuse can
become a vicious circle.

184 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

¢ Everyone meets difficult people at some time in their lives. Concentrate on
solving the problem and listen to the concerns of your adversary for some
insights into how to work through the situation.

¢ Todeal effectively with anger, admit anger, and take time to reflect on your
reasons for responding in that way.

¢ Frustration means we meet a roadblock while working toward our goals.
* Conflicting situations may be:

— approach-approach (both choices are good)
—avoidance-avoidance (both choices are negative)
— approach-avoidance (there is a combination of positive and
negative factors)
* Dr. Hans Selye is a Canadian who is an expert on stress. He states that some
amount of stress is healthy; uncontrolled stress is not healthy.

¢ A direct link between emotions and illness has been established.

¢ Death is a natural part of our existence. Young children should be helped to
face death because eventually they will come in contact with it through the
death of pets, grandparents, or other family members.

¢ Suicide is a particularly sensitive situation. For people contemplating suicide, a
strong network of support is comforting. Helping the bereaved deal with the
suicide of someone close takes special skills.

* Defense mechanisms protect a person’s self-esteem When it comes under
threat.

¢ There are many different kinds of defense mechanisms: repression,
suppression, compensation, overcompensation, sublimation, projection,
introjection, identification, reaction formation, procrastination, displaced
aggression, rationalization, and regression.

¢ There are many useful tips to help us deal with stress and pressures. A person
must look after physical health, watch for ways to encourage mental health by
having a good attitude, and look for ways to introduce positive emotional
control.

¢ Pets are very important for one’s physical and mental health.

¢ Inmany special cases pets have shown they have tremendous therapeutic
value for the ill, the dependent, and the disturbed individual.

* Touchis one of the very positive emotional connections we establish with
others.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 185

* The general public perceives that violence and crime are escalating at
unbelievable rates. The truth is that some crime is gradually increasing, but
statistics indicate that fairly stable levels are shown for some offenses.

¢ Victims of crimes face many physical injuries as well as a number of
psychological torments that range from feelings of violation to overwhelming
thoughts of fear and insecurity.

* Unfortunately a large number of families experience violence in the home in
some form or another. Before marriage, people should take a close look for
signs of potential abuse in their mates.

¢ The media reports many incidents of violence all the time. The violence a
person is exposed to on TV can have a tremendous impact on their attitudes
and behaviour regarding violence.

* Many schools and communities have accepted a Zero Tolerance Policy for
acts of aggression and violence from young people.

¢ The Young Offenders’ Act, passed in 1984, deals with young people between
12 and 18 years of age. It advocates shorter prison terms for youth crime,
and protects the identity of these young people.

* Kleptomaniacs have an uncontrolled urge to steal items. Sometimes their
actions are based on sexual excitement; sometimes they are motivated by
revenge against authority figures.

¢ Pyromania or the urge to set fires is caused by rebellion against authority,
destructive urges, and the quest for sexual excitement.

* The psychopath may seem charming, yet here are some of their dangerous
qualities: habitual liars, self-centred, impulsive, and emotionally callous.

¢ A psychopath is a person with no conscience (superego). Therefore they have
no moral principles in their relationships with others.

* The psychopathic personality may develop due to poor socialization in early
childhood or alienation from close bonds with the parents. Some
psychologists believe that psychopaths are born, not raised to be that way.

¢ Sexual assault is the sexual control and violation of someone against their will.
The rapist seeks to express anger, rage, and dominance.

* Cults are groups that recruit and control people based on the perspective of
the cult which could be based on religion, politics, self discovery, or marketing
motives.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 5 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

186 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
