Lesson 3: Neurosis

Overview

The term neurosis sounds mysterious and even exciting, but for people who are
affected by it, itis any thing but glamourous. Is there any justification for studying
bizarre mental conditions besides the fact that they are fascinating to research? Statistics
indicate that approximately 10% of the population suffer from some mental disorder
requiring professional treatment. One in ten young people are troubled by serious
emotional problems. Half of the routine medical cases treated by doctors are
compounded by a mental illness factor. Those facts alone are good reasons to study
neurosis.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 187

188

Lesson 3 will focus on these topics:

¢ Beginning With Normal Behaviour

¢ Mentally Challenged Versus Mentally Ill
¢ The Pain of Labels

¢ Neurosis: Excessive Anxiety

* Causes of Neurosis

* Amnesia and Dissociation

* Conversion Hysteria

¢ Psychosomatic Illness and Hypochondria
* Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

* Obsessive — Compulsive Behaviour

* Anorexia Nervosa

* Phobias

* Depression

¢ Brainwashing

Beginning With Normal Behaviour

Which of these feelings have you experienced: unexplainable worry or anxiety about
the future; suspicions that people do not like you or are laughing at you; mood swings
from joy to depression? These reactions are pretty common, aren’t they? Occasionally
feeling worried, suspicious, or anxious about something is natural. But when these
feelings are exaggerated or persist over long periods of time, they may become
abnormal.

What distinguishes mental disturbance from normal behaviour? Let’s begin by
sketching a general outline of what is viewed as being normal. Normal people have
accepted the challenges of everyday life, meet conflicts as they arise, attack problems
realistically, and have a positive orientation to life. Normal people are able to adjust to
the problems and disruptions that come their way.

Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Normal behaviour is behaviour which is typical of a group of people within the boundaries
of aculture. Each society determines the range of behaviour it considers normal. All
behaviour outside that range is labelled abnormal for that society. What is normal in one
society may be abnormal in others. Let’s use an example to illustrate this principle. For
example, some Native tribes celebrated the Potlatch when they got together for social
occasions. A rich chief would either give away or destroy many of his possessions. This
behaviour was considered normal for that Native society. If we suddenly started exhibiting
that kind of behaviour (destroying possessions or giving them away), people might wonder if
we were mentally stable. Thus we can see that normal behaviour is linked to what is
accepted as routine ways of acting for a certain society.

MELT hy

Mentally Challenged versus Mentally Ill

Before we begin our discussion of neurosis, let’s pause to make an important distinction.
The mentally challenged (at one time called mentally retarded) and the mentally ill are not the
same. Mentally challenged people have a physical impairment resulting from brain damage
or lack of brain development. The result is that intellectual capacity is below average.
Sometimes the damage occurs before birth due to chromosome deficiencies in the
developing baby. Sometimes the damage may occur during the birth process if the baby is
deprived of oxygen for too long at that time or if the baby receives an injury to the head
during a difficult birth. A person with Down’s Syndrome (having an extra chromosome in the
body) would be considered mentally challenged. Excellent progress is now being made with
mentally challenged people, but they cannot be cured in the sense that their intellectual
ability cannot be restored to full potential.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 189

Mental illness refers to having faulty reasoning about something. It means having unusual
misconceptions about life which are sometimes accompanied by strange behaviour. For
example, people with schizophrenia would be considered mentally ill because they
experience hallucinations, delusions, and mixed up thinking patterns. Many people with
mental illnesses find that therapy or drug treatment is helpful in controlling or reducing their
mental problems. Some mentally ill people are able to once again return to a normal lifestyle
as fully functioning members of society.

The Pain Of Labels

Throughout this lesson and the following one, you will be learning about a number of
behavioural disorders. Some words of caution must be kept in mind before you begin.
The label of abnormal or sick can be very negative and should not be used in an
irresponsible way. If a person has a mental illness, the public reacts with fear, suspicion,
and even feelings of outright rejection.

The proper diagnosis of a mental condition requires a lengthy and precise assessment
from an extensively trained psychologist or therapist. When people have physical
illnesses, there is a great outpouring of sympathy and concern. But people are not
charitable with those feelings when it comes to mental illness. Even though mentally ill
people are not held legally responsible for their actions, the public perceives that they
are in some way to blame for becoming mentally ill.

190 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

— =
neurosis —a
psychological
disorder
characterized by
anxiety, guilt and
depression

ee <«<((0)))>

In general, mental illness is perceived to be a handicapped condition that has no sympathy.
Some people may reason that if there is no physical basis for mental illness, then people
become abnormal of their own free will. The public may falsely assume that mentally ill
people can snap out of their present condition with a little self-discipline.

With these public perceptions in mind, it is easy to see how labelling can be a dangerous
practice. We must be cautious. It is easy to carelessly attach a label to a person, but when a
label is applied it can be very difficult for that person to prove that they are once again
normal. Labelling is a value judgment which indicates that the person’s behaviour is
perceived to be inappropriate in some way and should be corrected.

Labels can represent serious handicaps. Use them with caution.
Neurosis: Excessive Anxiety

Neurosis is a psychological disorder characterized by anxiety, guilt, or depression.
Although an individual can be deeply upset by these factors, the person still has a clear idea
of reality and can function reasonably well in society.

There is not a great dividing line between being normal on one hand and being neurotic on
the other hand. Sometimes neurosis may develop from an extreme use of the normal
defense mechanisms. In general, the neurotic still has an understanding of reality, some
measure of judgment, a certain degree of social adjustment, and an awareness that he or she
isill.

Neurosis is characterized by the fact that some function of the personality escapes
conscious control. Here are some other factors that will identify neurosis:

* aloss of memory fora group of
ideas

* anuncontrollable fear for which
no cause is apparent

* amalfunctioning ofa bodily
organ for which there seems to
be no physical cause

* anodd behaviour pattern such
as a twitching muscle, a curious
movement of the hands ora
speech difficulty

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 191

The most distinguishing characteristic of neurosis is excessive anxiety. The person is ina
state of continual fear that something terrible is about to happen. Let’s get a clear picture of
the difference between neurotic anxiety
and ordinary worry. For example, if there
is sickness in the home or when we are
uncertain of our financial security, we are
experiencing natural anxiety. However,
anxiety neurosis appears without any real
cause. Itis often so intense that it can
only be described as panic. People with
anxiety neurosis may experience lingering
feelings of uneasiness. Sometimes their
feelings of dread become acute. Anxiety
arising from a repression of hostility or
sexual desires are common. The neurotic
person has the tendency to overreact to
many routine incidents which the average
person takes in stride.

Sometimes a neurotic person experiences intense fear which generalizes to include anxiety
about anything and everything. Anxiety may be free floating or not attached to any specific
object, event, or situation. The reason for the anxiety is often not readily observed or
known. If you experience a feeling of fear several times a day and in different situations
without knowing why, you have free floating anxiety.

Bound anxiety is associated with a specific object, event, or situation. For example, you
feel a great deal of fear whenever you are in a certain area of the neighbourhood and
you realize it is because there is a big dog in one of the back yards. You have a great
fear of dogs, and therefore you are experiencing bound anxiety. You realize the dog is
the reason for your experience of fear. When a person has free floating anxiety, the
vague nature of the anxiety is responsible for much of the terror experienced by the
patient. The person’s feelings are intense but he or she has no rational explanation to
account for them. One of the main functions of psychotherapy is to pinpoint the source
of anxiety in order to make it a manageable fear. If you put a name on the problem, then
you can do something about it because you understand the cause.

192 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Besides anxiety, what are some of the other symptoms of neurosis? Most neurotic
individuals feel inadequate, tense, irritable, and dissatisfied with life. They are rigid and
guarded in their thinking and are unable to withstand much stress without becoming
emotionally disturbed. Individuals suffering from anxiety reactions may voice
complaints in terms of such feelings as confusion, restlessness, sluggish thinking, dread
of impending illness, or fear of indescribable danger. The physical signs of fear are
often present including rapid heartbeat, difficulty in swallowing or breathing,
perspiration, tenseness, nausea, exhaustion, dizzy spells, cold sweats, headaches,
stomach pains, dry mouth, and cold, moist hands and feet. The patient may also
complain of insomnia, loss of appetite, and the inability to work.

Because neurotic people believe there is so much anxiety in their lives, they tend to use
the defense mechanism repression to hide ideas they find unpleasant. Another reason
feelings of anxiety are repressed or denied is because of guilt associated with the event
or because there is emotional pain when recalling it. When an idea or feeling is
repressed, the purpose is to reduce anxiety by denying the existence of that threatening
idea. When people use repression too frequently, their contacts with the real world
become limited. In psychotherapy, the original source of anxiety must be openly
identified so it may be dealt with by the individual. Neurotic people use so much
energy keeping repressed anxiety under control that they do not have very much energy
left over for pleasurable and productive activities.

Causes Of Neurosis

Neurotic behaviour is generally believed to be based on faulty emotional habits and
attitudes. Neurotic disturbances usually stem from irrational thoughts rather than
physical defects. However, physical factors may also contribute to the development of
neurosis in a small number of cases. Neurotic patterns may develop if some of the
glands do not function properly, especially the thyroid gland.

The following factors appear to form a common thread in the development of many
neurotic conditions:

¢ Emotional disturbances were frequently recorded in members of the neurotic’s
family.

¢ Asachild, the neurotic may have experienced trauma, sexual repression, and
ostracism (or rejection by others).

¢ During childhood there were above average demands on the neurotic to “be
good”.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 193

==
dissociation — a
neurotic reaction
to extreme stress
which disrupts the
normal
association of
thoughts,
memories, and
behaviour

se

Today greater emphasis is being placed on the early detection and prevention of
behaviour disorders. People tend to seek treatment when their abnormal behaviour
hampers their ability to function. A decision regarding active treatment is usually made
with these factors in mind:

* persistence of the problem
* degree of interference the problem causes with one’s everyday life

* importance of the problem in the eyes of the individual and those close to the person

Acommon mechanism used by neurotics to control anxiety is to avoid any direct
confrontation with the source of anxiety. Thus one of the goals of therapy is for neurotic
people to remodel their self-concept and to see themselves as someone who can meet
anxiety-producing situations and retain control. Another rehabilitative technique for the
neurotic is learning to express hostility in adequate ways which builds a healthy, integrated
personality.

Amnesia And Dissociation

Certain actions, feelings and thoughts usually
occur together as a group of related activities.
Dissociation causes a disruption or split in a
person’s integrated, consistent concept of
themselves from day to day. Dissociation is a
behaviour disorder in which the main part of the
individual’s personality is in conflict with other
activities the person may be tempted to do. For
example, Sue perceives herself to be a loving,
caring kind of person. Dissociation causes her to
frequently become abrupt with her associates and
suddenly she decides to cheat on her steady
boyfriend. Stress can cause dissociation to take
place. Amnesia or memory loss is a kind of
dissociative reaction.

Amnesia means that all or major parts of the memory are “forgotten”. When amnesia
occurs personal memories and personal identity is repressed or forgotten by the individual.
By contrast, the person still retains general knowledge, habits, special talents, and overall
information about how to function in society. For example, an amnesia patient may not
remember their own name, address, or information about their family and friends (personal
knowledge). They will likely know how to operate a car, how to eat with a knife and fork,
or how to sing or play the piano (general knowledge). Personal memories may be painful for
the person so these memories are temporarily forgotten. General knowledge is emotionally
nonthreatening, so those memories are retained.

194 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
fugue — amnesia
involving running
away from one’s
familiar
surroundings

ee

<0) aa
somnambulism —
a sleep walking
disturbance

=< «<((0)

ea
non-insane
automatism —
being unaware of
committing a
violent act during
sleep

ee <<<((0))>)

Fugue amnesia (from the Latin word “to flee’’) is the most extreme type of amnesia. It
describes a situation whereby the person loses his/her memory and runs away or escapes to
a strange environment. A young woman in Alberta experienced fugue amnesia. She lost
knowledge of her personal memories, hitchhiked to California, and was found wandering
and disoriented. She was brought home by family members, but even in a familiar
environment, she struggled to remember the details of her life prior to her attack of amnesia.

Memory may be restored after a bout of amnesia by using therapy to treat the repression.
Sometimes memory will return after a highly emotional experience. Recovering memory is
one of the primary goals when treating a person for amnesia. Another important objective is
healing the conflicts that caused the amnesia attack in the first place.

Another interesting phenomenon related to dissociation is sleep disorders. Somnambulism
is sleep walking. Sleep problems are not related to mental illness. They occur due to
neurological or physiological disruptions that upset the normal behaviour of the brain during
sleep. You may recall from the section on sleep earlier in this course, mention was made of
REM which means rapid eye movements which are present during the deeper stages of
sleep. Usually sleep walking occurs during the non-REM stages of sleep.

During REM sleep or dream sleep, the motor
functions of the body are prevented from engaging
in any activity. So you may dream that you are
running across a field but your body remains
motionless. When an REM sleep disorder occurs,
people can become mobile while they are dreaming
because the mechanism that usually prevents this
from happening has been blocked. Sometimes the
actions that the dreamer is engaged in have a very
violent nature. In a few cases people have
committed murder in their sleep or have caused
serious injury to others—sometimes their own loved
ones! This phenomenon is called non-insane
automatism because it is a behaviour that the
person is not aware of. In fact, these people are
usually horrified when told of the violent things they
have done. One of the treatments for severe sleep
walking disorders is medication such as
tranquillizers or antiseizure drugs. Usually men

commit violent sleep-related crimes more often than women.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 195

qn
conversion
hysteria

physical
symptoms develop
when energy
behind a
repressed emotion
upsets the smooth
functioning of a
body organ

ae

Conversion Hysteria

Sometimes a repressed emotion becomes converted into a physical symptom in order to
relieve the emotional strain. When conversion hysteria occurs, there is no actual biological
or organic changes to the body but the individual experiences problems with sensory or
motor functioning. Freud’s theory on conversion hysteria was that the energy behind the
repressed emotion becomes channelled into a physical reaction which eventually blocks and
disturbs the smooth functioning of the organ it is affecting.

Psychological distress is converted to physical distress. For example, you have to sing
in front of a large crowd of people. You are so afraid that you lose your voice
completely. You do not have laryngitis; you lose your voice due to extreme fear.
Distress is shown by adopting the role of a person with an actual pathologic illness.
Getting sick or developing a physical symptom is the way a person chooses to escape
from a dangerous psychological situation. IIness provides immunity and protection
from threatening situations because heavy demands are not made on sick people. Extra
attention and sympathy are extended to the sick. Therefore, the individual capitalizes on
conversion hysteria for these benefits as well.

Here are a few types of conversion hysteria:

paralysis .... any part of the body may be affected
anaesthesia .... a total loss of sensation
paraesthesia .... unusual reactions like tingling sensations or distorted
vision
glove/stocking anaesthesia .... loss of sensation in the areas covered by these garments
mutism .... inability to speak
aphonia .... inability to speak above a whisper
tremors and tics .... spasmodic movements in small groups of muscles
hysterical fit .... similar in outward symptoms to an epileptic seizure
hysterical twilight states .... feelings of haziness, disorientation; experiences are
distorted and dreamlike

People with conversion hysteria are usually quite indifferent to the ailments they have.
Their physical illnesses give them a legitimate excuse to avoid fearful situations. Even
when people attempt to treat their conversion hysteria, symptoms will reappear and
persist until the underlying conflict is dealt with and resolved. Dealing with the root
cause or conflict is the key to curing conversion hysteria.

196 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

0
hypochondriac

a person who
worries about a

number of
illnesses when
there is nothing
wrong
—=—O

Psychosomatic Disorders And Hypochondria

Psychosomatic disorders were discussed earlier in the course. They have a relationship to
the topic of neurosis as well. Because the mind and body interact, what is happening in the
mind can also have an effect on the body. Physical illness may be caused by prolonged
mental stress leading to psychosomatic illness. Psycho means mind and soma means body.
Emotional factors produce the ailments which often include actual damage to body tissue.
Treatment that helps relieve emotional tensions also helps to relieve organic damage. The
reverse is also true. It has been estimated that approximately half of all patients under a
physician’s care have illnesses arising from emotional stress or psychosomatic illness.

A hypochondriac is a person who is preoccupied with
bodily ailments and who exaggerates every minor
symptom or mild discomfort. Hypochondria is different
from psychosomatic illness. Psychosomatic illness is
actual physical illness which is the outcome of prolonged
periods of emotional stress. The person with
hypochondria worries that something is wrong with his
or her body when there is nothing wrong. For example,
hypochondriacs often read about a new illness and
decide they have that illness (when they don’t).

a

The hypochondriac is often said to enjoy poor health. The illnesses bring sympathy and
attention from others. Illness also gives the individual a convenient excuse not to participate
ina variety of activities. In this way illness gives the hypochondriac a form of security against
the possible risk of failure.

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

In the last few years there seems to be a steep increase in the reported cases of Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome. It is a condition which is misunderstood by the medical community and
the general public alike. Many sufferers are not given a lot of sympathy because many
people perceive that it is an attention seeking device and the lazy person’s way of avoiding a
lot of responsibility. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) affects about 2% of the population,
so it is not a rare illness. About 70% of the people afflicted are women. There are many
different symptoms associated with the illness such as debilitating fatigue which lasts for 6
months or longer, immune defects, sleep disturbances, low-grade fever, painful lymph
nodes, sore throat, chills, headaches, muscle pain and muscle weakness, depression, and
inability to perform daily activities.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 197

ay —
obsessions —
persistent,
irrational
thoughts that
repeatedly run
through the
person’s mind

ee <<<((0)>>

Only recently have doctors been able to diagnose
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. There are a variety of
theories about the cause. Brain scans reveal
differences between normal individuals and those
with CFS. There are patterns of decreased blood
flow in the limbic regions of the brain deep in the
temporal lobes. Further evidence shows low levels
of cortisol, a stress hormone, in the blood of CFS
patients. Some viruses which have not yet be
pinpointed could trigger the onset of the disease.
There are clear immune system differences between
CFS patients and healthy people.

At one time bed rest was the prescribed treatment
for CFS. Nowadays, patients are urged to
participate in light exercise, take some
antidepressants, and follow a healthy diet with herbs
and vitamins. Counselling is also available to CFS
patients to overcome depression. There is no cure
for CFS; it can last for years.

Even though Chronic Fatigue Syndrome is a physically-based illness, it is included in the
lesson on neurosis because like neurotic conditions it affects the everyday behaviour of the
people who have it.

Obsessive -— Compulsive Behaviour

The combination of obsessive-compulsive neurotic behaviours may involve: obsessive
thoughts, compulsive acts, or a combination of obsessive thoughts with compulsive acts.
Let’s look at each part of the obsessive-compulsive condition in turn.

Obsessions are simply persistent, irrational thoughts. The appearance of inappropriate
thoughts occur and will not leave the mind voluntarily. For example, you may believe that if
you do not attend every game that your high school basketball team plays, they will lose.
Then you will blame yourself for causing them to lose these games. That’s a strange idea,
isn’t it? But that’s the kind of weird logic that surrounds obsessions. Obsessions are ideas
heavily laden with strong emotions. A person may perceive obsessions to be dangerous
because they violate the individual’s personal goals and values.

The disruptions and annoyance that obsessions bring to the individual can cause a person to
feel constrained and disorganized. For example, an obsession might be a certain tune that
persists in one’s imagination or it may be a continually recurring conviction that one did not
turn off the stove. Obsessions are so insistent and recurrent that they limit a person’s actions

198 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
compulsions —
actions that result
from a strong,
persistent urge to
engage ina
particular
behaviour

ae <«<((0))>

by distracting the mind and draining all of the person’s energies in order to ensure their
control. These people spend so much time keeping their anxiety under control that they are
prevented from accomplishing something useful in their lives. For example, a person may
fear speaking out in public or doing something to embarrass themselves so they monitor
their behaviour with rigid strictness. The person who has obsessive behaviour may be
someone who is an extreme worrier. Obsessions focus on such topics as personal insecurity,
perfection, sex, aggression, guilt, love, and hate. For example, a person might harbour
obsessive fears of dirt and germs, of being poisoned or attacked, and fears of doing harm to
someone.

A compulsion is an action that results from an
irresistible inner force compelling the performance
of an act without, or even against the will of the
individual. For example, handwashing is one of the
most common of the compulsive acts. Most
compulsions reveal a profound concern for
cleanliness and order. It is as though the victim
were trying in this way to wash out some guilty
memory of past uncleanliness or misbehaviour.
Compulsive behaviour is never altered in any
detail; it is repetitive, ritualistic actions. Some
compulsive behaviours might be an urge to count
and then to recount something, persistent
mannerisms (tics), and compulsive sexual
behaviour.

To review: obsessions are persistent thoughts compulsions are repetitive actions

Acombination of obsessive-compulsive behaviour also exists. For example, a person is
plagued with constant anxiety about disease germs (obsession) and handles such fear with
excessive handwashing (compulsion). Superstitions are fascinating examples of obsessive-
compulsive actions. A superstition might demand some action. For example, you believe that
spilling salt is bad luck (obsession), so whenever that happens you have to throw some salt
over your shoulder to cancel the bad luck (compulsion). You might assess one of your own
pet superstitions in light of the information given.

Obsessive-compulsive disorders (OCD) are caused by a chemical imbalance. OCD usually
starts in adolescence. People affected realize there is something wrong with them. These
people are intelligent and perform their everyday tasks. At the same time, they carefully
conceal their secret disturbance from others. OCD tends to show up in other family
members. There is no cure for OCD but it can be effectively controlled with drugs or
therapy which helps the individual to get the upper hand on this behaviour. OCD may affect
as many as 3% of the population.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 199

gee
Tourette’s
Syndrome — a
compulsive
disorder involving
many different
motor tics and
vocal tics

ee

a=
anorexia nervosa
a severe eating
disorder
characterized by
a refusal to eat
which results in
the person
becoming
extremely thin

ae

An unusual compulsive behaviour is hair pulling know as trichotillomania. Hair
pulling is caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain and medication can correct it
although there is no known cure.

Related to compulsive disorders is the condition known as Tourette’s Syndrome. Itis a
condition which includes many different motor tics (related to body movement) and vocal
tics. Motor tics include such things as eye blinking, mouth opening, grimacing, or shoulder
shrugging. Vocal tics include such things as throat clearing, snorting, grunting, or barking. An
individual may repeat sounds or words. In some cases, an individual may involuntarily use
foul language (swearing), or may involuntarily make obscene gestures.

An individual experiencing Tourette’s Syndrome may have tics many times a day. The
location of the tics on the body and their frequency can change over time. The disorder
usually begins sometime during childhood and affects more males than females.
Research is still not clear about causes but neurotransmitters in the brain are involved in
some way. A variety of drugs may be used to keep the tics under control so they no
longer interfere with the individual’s daily life. Self-control is difficult for people with
Tourette’s Syndrome because it is a complex neurochemical problem. The person with
Tourette’s should not feel cornered either physically or emotionally. The goal of any
treatment or therapy is not to eliminate the tics but to bring them under some measure of
control.

Anorexia Nervosa

Anorexia nervosa is an extreme loss of appetite over a long period of time for
emotional reasons. The individual finds it impossible to consume food. In some cases
even actual threat of death by starvation will not sway a person from their refusal to eat.
Anorexia nervosa occurs in women more often than in men in a ratio of nine to one.
One usual reason behind the disorder is fear of sexual maturity, thus the patient attempts
to remain excessively thin and underdeveloped. Another reason for anorexia is that
food may be associated with impregnation because the body expands with healthy
eating habits as it does with pregnancy. Anorexia nervosa may by motivated by
retaliation. Because parents often express worry over the child’s proper eating habits,
rejection of food becomes an ideal method the child uses to exert control in their lives.
The anorexic seeks precise control over his or her body and body functions, and uses
food as a means of reaching that goal. Some of the side effects of anorexia are hair loss,
tooth and nail decay (from lack of nutrition), and a feeling of body coldness all the time.

Anorexia commonly begins between the ages of 14 to 25 years. About one-third of the
people who have this condition will recover fully. Times of high stress may cause a
person to relapse during treatment. About 15 to 20 % will find the condition fatal due to
medical complications and some will commit suicide.

200 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=
bulimia —an
eating disorder
marked by eating
binges
alternating with
purging (or
getting rid of
consumed food
through vomiting
laxatives or
excessive
exercising)

ee <<((0)))>

— =
phobia — an
excessive,
irrational fear of
some object or
situation that
occurs in the
absence of any
danger

Oe

Bulimia is an eating disorder related to anorexia,
but quite different as well. The bulimic goes on an
eating binge, consuming vast quantities of food and
then attempts to get rid of the food by self-induced
vomiting, by excessive use of laxatives, by periods
of fasting, or by excessive exercising. So the
procedures are different between bulimia and
anorexia, but the underlying reasons are similar: an
obsessive concern with body weight and body
image, an abnormal fear of fatness, and an intense
desire for control in one’s life. Often the person’s
dentist can see the telltale signs of bulimia by the
condition of the patient’s teeth from constant
vomiting. Some of the medical effects of self-
starvation include dry skin, reduced energy, loss of
menstruation, low body temperature, low heart rate,
low blood pressure, and hair growth that is slow.

When either bulimia or anorexia continues for many years, serious damage is done to the
body which needs basic nutrition to grow and function normally. The person afflicted with
eating disorders has a very distorted self-perception. They look into the mirror and see
someone they consider fat and ugly even though they may weigh less than 100 pounds.
Bulimia and anorexia are extreme forms of dieting where people risk their health and their
lives to attain a thin body image.

Phobias

Phobias are excessive, irrational fears that go far beyond natural fear and occur in the
absence of real danger. Phobias are often successfully hidden from the attention of medical
personnel and casual acquaintances. Many individuals accept their phobias as an inevitable
part of their lives. They quietly plan self-imposed limitations on their daily lives to control
their phobias without bringing attention to their problems. Repression causes the victims to
be unaware of the source of underlying hostilities related to their particular phobia.

Anentirely normal apprehension or fear could get out of hand and escalate until it becomes
a phobia which controls your life. For example, a healthy respect for elevator safety keeps
you alive; a phobic fear that prevents you from getting into an elevator can be a serious
disadvantage if you live in or work in a high-rise building. No phobia should be taken lightly.
In extreme cases, acute fear or panic can do severe damage. In many cases, extreme fear in
the form of a phobia produces physical symptoms and feelings of uncontrollable terror.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 201

The boundaries of a phobia vary. In some cases a phobia is confined to a specific
object or event. However, sometimes the phobic problem worsens as the number of
phobias spread and grow to include other objects and situations. There are some signs
that some people are continually fear-prone so if one phobia problem is removed, the
victim may quickly acquire another. In theory, a person could go through life developing
one phobia after another if proper treatment is not undertaken. Here is a small list

of phobias:

claustrophobia ..
acrophobia ..
lyssophobia ..
necrophobia ..
agoraphobia ..
xenophobia ..
zoophobia ..
toxophobia ..
ochlophobia ..
hydrophobia ..
nyctophobia ..
heliophobia ..
phengophobia ..
astraphobia ..
hematophobia ..
pathophobia ..
ophidiophobia ..
monophobia ..
pyrophobia ..
domatophobia ..
cardiophobia ..
gatophobia ..
arachnophobia ..
erythrophobia ..
agyiophobia ..

orniphobia

.. enclosed spaces
.. heights

.. becoming insane
death

open places (“housewives” disease)
strangers

. animals

.. poisoning

.. crowds

. water

darkness
sunlight

daylight

.. thunderstorms

.. blood

.. disease

.. snakes

.. being alone

.. fire

being in a house
heart disease
cats

.. Spiders

.. the colour red

What are some of the reasons people develop such strong and such weird phobias?
The conditioning theory explains it this way. First, an emotionally traumatic
experience occurs. That may trigger feelings of guilt which the person attempts to
repress or push from their mind. Therefore, unusual fears are commonly traceable
to early experiences in which these situations possessed a terrifying hold on the

person.

202 Section Three: Studying Behaviour

ADLC Geneyral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

I=
desensitization —
a method of
reducing fears by
gradually
introducing the
person to
situations or
objects connected
with their fears

Oe

(0) ca
flooding — a
method of
treating fears by
forcing the person
to immediately
confront their
fears

(0)

A second theory known as the dynamic theory explains phobias in a slightly
different way. Impulses that we are not aware of (unconscious) generate an
emotional response. The person will not allow the impulse to be expressed, but the
underlying emotion still remains. Emotional anxiety eventually builds up and the
person uses a phobia as a defense mechanism for protection. The person
unconsciously chooses an object and believes that object is the source of anxiety.
The person has attached a definite (although not necessarily accurate) label to his or
her fears and maintains control of anxiety by the avoiding the phobic object or
situation. The object identified as the phobic one may be purely symbolic, or it may
have a genuinely close connection to the underlying conflict or perceived danger
experienced by the individual.

But perhaps more important than the theory behind the phobia is the concern about
how the phobia can be effectively treated. As one person said, “Does it matter how you
lost your left foot in an accident? The most important thing is how do you teach a
person to function effectively without the use of one of their feet.” The same is true for
a phobia. What sorts of therapies bring the best
results?

One of the most gentle ways of treating a phobia
is through desensitization. First, the phobic
patient is asked to relax. Then, the patient is led
through a hierarchy of fear—he or she is asked
to imagine a mild fear in relation to the phobia.
The patient gradually imagines successive
scenes that are more directly involved with the
source of fear and therefore are more terrifying.
For example, if you have a phobia about birds.
The therapists using desensitization would ask
you to look at pictures of birds, then be in a
room with stuffed birds, then be a block away
from a live bird, and eventually get very close to
areal bird. Patients lose their fear in small steps.

Flooding means that the patient is confronted
with the full phobic reaction right in the
beginning by being exposed to the full emotional experience all in one step. So, the
flooding method of phobia therapy exposes a patient to the exact object of fear at the
start of the treatment. For example, if you have a bird phobia, a live bird would be
placed close by you in the initial treatment session. You would have to adapt to your
fears and conquer them immediately.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 203

Depression

Unlike some of the other neurotic behaviours, depression is part of our everyday
— = vocabulary. Some people use it casually to mean they are temporarily “down in the dumps”.
depression — a But depression is also related to much more serious emotional concerns. What is
lingering mood of — depression? Depression is a debilitating mood that lasts for several weeks or longer. It
sadness, interferes with our work, our relationships, our social life, and our sense of personal worth.
hopelessn 7 os. It is characterized by pessimism that interferes with the way a person needs to function in
anxiety; a deep his/her everyday life. Some of the more specific symptoms include:
gloom which
causes a disrup- . irritability or sadness
tion in mental and
physical activities

ee <((0)

* inexplicable fatigue
* aches and pains

¢ loss of appetite, digestion problems, constipation
* bouts of crying

* lack of sexual interest

* sleep disturbances

* feelings of anxiety, guilt, and worthlessness
* inability to concentrate or make decisions
* restlessness or lethargy

* thoughts of suicide

A ccombination of social/emotional factors along
with genetic variables is thought to be the cause of
depression. Unpleasant, stressful situations in
one’s life can trigger depression like loss of a job,
serious financial difficulties, termination of a
marriage or long term relationship, the onset of a
serious illness, or the death of someone very
close. A person’s life history is another factor to
consider. As a child, the person may have been
subjected to many traumas. A person may have
endured physical or sexual abuse. Yet it is
interesting to note that many people who have
experienced the horrors of being raised in a war-
torn country do not develop depression.

204 = Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

An imbalance in one’s brain chemistry is another possible cause of depression
according to recent research. A deficiency of serotonin can cause alteration of moods
and the growth of negative thoughts and emotions. Physicians treating their depressed
patients with antidepressants note that when the chemical imbalance is treated, the
depression goes away. Then comes the question: does depression alter the brain
chemistry or does the imbalance in brain chemistry lead to the depression? Which one
comes first? Another interesting question is: if depression is strictly due to a chemical
imbalance, then why are the number of depressed people increasing dramatically over
the past few decades? Perhaps depression is linked to increasing social problems in our
society.

Approximately 3 million Canadians are afflicted with clinical depression. Unfortunately
only about one-third of these people will seek help of any kind. Depression commonly
strikes the age group between 24 to 44 years of age. Women are thought to experience
depression more than men but perhaps women tend to reach out to others and seek help
more than men do, so that perception may not be entirely true. People tend to link
depression to feelings of sadness. That emotion is likely most prevalent for depressed
women. But depression has also been associated with feelings of hostility and
aggression which are more often shown by men when they feel depressed. One cannot
assume that men and women are the same when it comes to depression. There is a
strong link between female hormones and moods, so this is one obvious difference.

If depression is untreated, there is always the possibility
of a suicide risk. But even mild depression can ebb
away at a person’s creative energy, so treatment is
definitely recommended rather than simply letting the
person come out of the depression by themselves.
Approach a depressed acquaintance in the same way
you would someone with a physical illness and give
them support. Listen if the person wants to talk out
some of their problems. Help with daily chores if that is
possible. Join the person for little social outings like a
walk, coffee, or going to a movie. People withdraw
from others when they are depressed, but this is the time
when they need outside contacts the most. To be
mentally healthy, people need strong connections to
meaningful employment, their communities, and of
course their families.

If you are the depressed person, ask your family doctor for a referral to a counsellor,
psychologist, or therapist. Sometimes a local distress line or crisis line may give you a
place to start. Don’t let depression go untreated.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 205

Brainwashing

The human mind is a complex and fascinating processor and creator of ideas. The way a
person’s mind functions is unique and has a direct impact on who we are—our personality.
For these reasons, the progressive societies of the world find the idea of forcibly controlling
someone else’s mind a very abhorrent, unethical idea. This position about mind control was
not always endorsed, even in our own society. Certainly during wartime, these high ideals
denouncing the use of mind control were certainly not followed.

For example, during the Korean War in the early 1950’s communist powers were using
brainwashing or mind control as a weapon against captured prisoners. The idea was to
destroy the individual’s personality and beliefs and then reprogram or implant new
ideas that were in line with the “enemy’s beliefs”. It is a very vicious way of
influencing the person and causing them to abandon the philosophy of life that they
voluntarily chose as they became adults.

The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) under the American government decided that
they should experiment and collect data about brainwashing so that they too could use
this means of control. They asked a psychologist at a Montreal institute if he would
collect information on mind control that would be useful to them. Canadians who came
to the clinic for help with their psychological problems were used in the mind control
experiments without their consent or their knowledge that this was actually happening
to them.

What sorts of maltreatment did these mentally ill patients suffer? The first step was to
depattern or rather destroy the person’s original personality. Then the patients would be
vulnerable to new ideas and beliefs that would later be implanted. Erasing the patients’
original ideas was accomplished by forcing them to live under strict environmental
control. Some were given the hallucinogenic drug, LSD. Some were controlled by
forcing them to sleep for long periods of time—even days by administering drugs or
using insulin injections to create a coma. High-voltage shock therapy was another
method applied to control and alter the personalities of depressed patients. Another
technique that was used to subdue patients was something called psychic driving which
means that the person had to listen to tape recordings with repetitive messages until it
wore them down. In some cases a combination of these treatments were applied.

Were the brainwashing experiments successful in accomplishing the task of controlling
the minds’ of the people unfortunate enough to become patients or rather victims of
such treatment? Most people in the program experienced permanent harm from the
unethical methods used against them to alter their personalities and beliefs. Some lost
many of their early memories of their lives; many experienced lasting nightmares from
the treatment they received at the Montreal clinic which attempted to brainwash them.

206 Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

These people and their families have sought justice by bringing lawsuits against the

CIA for initiating such a destructive program. The patients have received payment but
that does not compensate for the terrible damage that has been done to their minds and

to their self-concepts.
Summary
This lesson gave you the opportunity to study some of the unusual neurotic behaviours

people develop when plagued by guilt, anxiety, and stress. Neurosis interferes with a
person’s everyday functioning, but it is usually not serious enough to completely destroy

the

person’s sense of self and their ability to cope with life. Neurosis takes many shapes and

forms. Let’s review what you have learned in this lesson.

To summarize:

¢ Each culture’s definition of normal behaviour is different.

¢ Being normal means adjusting to the demands and expectations of your own
culture whatever they may be.

* Mentally challenged people are those whose mental development has been
hampered by birth defects or injuries of some kind.

¢ Mental illness refers to problems with one’s perceptions of life and one’s
behaviour patterns.

« Although we may be tempted to diagnose someone else’s behaviour and
attach a label to it, we must remember that labels can impose a very
negative value judgement.

* One of the chief characteristics of people with neurosis is the excessive
anxiety they feel.

* Free floating anxiety means that the person has a general feeling of worry
or uneasiness that is not connected to any specific object, event, or
situation.

¢ Bound anxiety is linked to a specific cause—an object, event, or situation.
¢ Neurotic individuals feel irritable, tense, and dissatisfied with life.

¢ Amnesia means that people forget important memories from their past
through repression and dissociation or disconnecting key links between
activities and behaviour.

* Sleep disturbances are another type of dissociation; sometimes sleep
walking disorders can be violent in nature.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour

207

¢ Conversion hysteria occurs when strong, repressed emotions disturb the
smooth functioning of some body organ.

* The hypochondriac continually worries about many body ailments just for
the sake of getting sympathy and attention.

¢ Chronic Fatigue Syndrome prevents people from performing everyday
functions when they are overcome by such symptoms as: an
overwhelming sense of fatigue, headaches, muscle pain, fever, and
depression.

* Obsessive behaviours are persistent thoughts that grip the mind.
¢ Compulsive behaviours are repetitive, ritualistic actions.

* Obsessive-compulsive behaviours are a combination of rigid ideas and
controlling behaviours.

¢ Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder whereby the young person stops
eating until they become thin almost to the point of starvation.

* Bulimia is an eating disorder characterized by periods of binge (nonstop)
eating and then purging to get rid of the food that has been consumed.

¢ Phobias are types of intense, panic fear reactions; a person will go to any
lengths to avoid the specific object or event that creates a phobia.

* Desensitization is a method of treating fears or phobias by having a person
gradually confront the object that is feared using small steps with more
and more frightening situations.

¢ Flooding is a method of treating fears or phobias by immediately
confronting the feared object right from the beginning.

* Depression is a serious physical/emotional state that causes a person to be
unable to function when fulfilling everyday duties.

¢ A depressed person will display some of the following characteristics:
feelings of worthlessness and sadness, problems with sleeping,
restlessness, fatigue, digestive problems, body pains, and inability to
concentrate on tasks.

¢ Brainwashing means forcibly controlling a person’s mind by destroying
their personality and beliefs and then programming them with new ideas.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 6 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

208 — Section Three: Studying Behaviour ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Lesson 4: Psychosis

Overview

In Lesson 3 you examined some of the less severe social and personality disturbances
known as neurosis. Psychosis is even more of a challenge to treat, and if possible, to
control. What is psychosis? How does it compare with neurosis? How does a person
become psychotic? Psychosis sounds very dangerous and threatening. Are there any
dangers involved with these illnesses? The topic of psychosis raises a number of
concerns that you will examine in this lesson.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section Three: Studying Behaviour 209
