SECTION ONE

Introduction to Psychology

Wilhelm Wundt
German Psychologist

Lesson 1: Psychology — A Look Into The Past

Overview

Lesson | will focus on these topics:
¢ The Nature of Psychology
* Basic Goals of Psychology
¢ Wundt’s Fist Psychological Laboratory
¢ Freud, the Most Famous Psychologist
¢ Freud’s Theory of Personality
* Carl Jung: Extravert/Introvert
* The Behaviourists’ Theories
* The Humanists’ Ideas —- Maslow and Rogers
* An Eclectic View

* Sleep and Dreams

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 1

=I
psychology — the

science of human

behaviour

ee <<<((0))>

ae
consciousness —
awareness of
some element of
the surroundings

ee <<((0))))

What is Psychology?

One hundred years ago, the word psychology was a strange new word to the average
person. Today people use it frequently to describe events in their everyday lives. Books
on psychology line the shelves of many bookstores. Drugstores display magazines with
many articles on psychology-related subjects. Even the comics deal with
psychoanalysis, IQs, and hypnosis.

Why is it that psychology has gained such popularity? The answer is fairly simple. The
study of psychology is the study of ourselves. From earliest times, people have been
curious about their own nature. For example, they wondered what actually happened in
their dreams when they would be visiting faraway places or doing impossible things
like flying through the air. Yet when they awoke, they would be in the same place
where they had lain down to sleep. How could that be explained? Was there an
invisible person inside who took these journeys while the body remained behind? What
left the body when people died and ceased to breathe, to talk, to laugh, and to touch?

Gradually, from these questions the idea of a soul developed. Later the Greeks named it
the psyche which is the mind or the soul. The Greek word logia means a study of
something. Therefore, psychology is the study of the mind or soul. Today
psychologists no longer use the word “soul” when speaking of the study of this science.
Watch for a modern definition of psychology in the following paragraph.

Psychology became the study of the mind and its various faculties. The mind was
thought to exist separately from the body. As the study of psychology developed,
psychology limited its investigations to the study of consciousness. The consciousness
is what a person feels, thinks, or is aware of in some way like colours, shape, smell,
pain or other sensations. But even the definition of psychology as the study of
consciousness soon proved to be inadequate. Why was this true? It was found that a
good deal of behaviour and even a certain amount of thinking took place beneath the
conscious level in the realm we now call the unconscious. Therefore, today the
meaning of psychology has been broadened to include the study of all behaviour,
whether conscious or unconscious. We may now define psychology as the science of
human behaviour.

2 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=e
infer — to
interpret data
from one’s
personal point of
view

ee

Psychology involves curiosity and the desire to describe, explain, predict, and control
conditions within our environment and within ourselves. Having some control over the
events in our lives is certainly an advantage. Then we do not become “victims of fate”
for whatever circumstances come our way. It is also important for people to have a
sense of control over their own development so they have the power to reach out for
the self improvements they desire.

The Goals of Psychology

As a science, psychology has some important goals to achieve. First, psychology must
observe and record facts in order to understand what is happening. The goal of
psychology is to find an accurate description of human behaviour.

Sometimes it is very difficult to achieve an objective description of behaviour for many
different reasons. Human behaviour is very complex and may be interpreted in a
number of ways. A psychologist may not find it easy to maintain an unbiased attitude
when describing the behaviour that has been observed. Furthermore, the psychologist
must distinguish between what is actually observed and what a person might infer
from witnessing a situation. Can you notice the difference between the two in these
examples?

In an actual observation the psychologist would say, “The person smiled, laughed, and
danced around the room.”

In an inferred observation the psychologist would say, “The person was overwhelmed
with happiness.”

A second goal of psychology is to explain the data that
has been collected. That task may seem straight
forward, but it is complicated by a number of factors.
One of these obstacles is the psychologist’s basic theory
about the nature of human beings. Are people born
“bad” or “born in sin’? Do parents have to firmly
discipline and mold the actions of the young in order to
curb this “bad” streak they have? Are people born
“good”? Do people have a natural tendency to follow a
behaviour that is “right and good” if they are given a
chance? Are people completely neutral as newborn
babies with no inclination to follow either pathway? In
fact, does a parent have complete control to shape the
responses of a baby in either a positive or negative
way?

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 3

(0) aaa
hypothesis —a
sophisticated
hunch adopted as
a tentative
explanation for a
situation which is
used as the basis
for further
investigation

ee <<<((0))>>

These questions are fascinating. Opinions will differ a great deal between you and
someone else about what is really “the truth”. You may be relieved to know that
opinions on these questions swing from one extreme to the other among knowledgeable
psychologists throughout the world. Later on in this lesson you will learn about a few
of the psychologists who have made quite an impact on the study of human behaviour
with the theories of human nature they have proposed.

A third important goal for psychology is to seek to know the future regarding human
behaviour. That is sometimes an impossible task because it means predicting and
preparing for events before they happen. The hypothesis is somewhat useful in
reaching for this goal. A psychological hypothesis is a sophisticated hunch that a certain
response is related in a particular way to some other response or condition. Sometimes
the predictions a psychologist makes will be accurate if:

¢ observations have been done with care, and
¢ the basic theory that is used has been sound

There are also many instances when predictions will prove to be wrong. Why?
Because, as we have said before, human behaviour is very complex, and, quite
truthfully, not even the most talented and conscientious psychologist has it completely
figured out!

How Did Psychology Gain Recognition?

For centuries, psychological thought has held the attention of great philosophical
thinkers as well as that of the average citizen. Some of the brilliant Greek philosophers
like Socrates, Plato and Aristotle had some fascinating ideas about the nature of human
behaviour. However, their theories were speculative and unproven. As long as
psychological ideas were untested theories, psychology was not given recognition and
status as a worthy subject.

In 1879 at the University of Leipzig in Germany, an
important development occurred which gave
psychology a new beginning. A German
psychologist named Wilhelm Wundt (pronounced
voont) decided it was time to set up the first real
psychological laboratory so that many of the
thought-provoking theories that had been debated
for years could actually be tested. Moving
psychology into the category of an experimental
science was a very significant step. Establishing a
laboratory to test data led to a major shift in
psychology from merely being a collection of
philosophical ideas, to becoming © “Wilhelm Wundt
an avenue for experimentation and research. German Psychologist

4 Section One: Psychology - A Look Into The Past ADLC Geneyral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Wundt declared that the main task of psychology was to study the mind. He was interested
in examining the relationship between sensations that a person experiences (like warmness
in temperature, brightness of lighting) and the affect these factors have on judgments the
person makes. Data on the way the senses operate was collected, tested, and published.
Wundt believed that the conscious mind brings together the sensations the person
experiences with the feelings that are aroused through those experiences. Sensations are
external factors from the surroundings; feelings are personal or inner reactions.

Wundt’s psychological laboratory was busy investigating such factors as: sensations,
feelings, attention (awareness of an event), perception (the data one absorbs), reaction time
(responses to an event), and association (similar factors that are grouped together). Wundt’s
laboratory tests, although simple and sometimes incomplete in their thoroughness,
nevertheless attained the objective of giving psychology an acceptance it had not had
before.

Sigmund Freud: World Renown Psychologist

Sigmund Freud was a brilliant scientist, physician,
psychologist, and psychoanalyst who lived in Vienna,
Austria from 1856 until the onset of World War II. He
has been credited with contributing more to
psychological thought than any other person in the
20th century. His name is easily recognized by the
average person outside the circles of people who work
in the field of psychology.

Sigmund Freud
Psychologist

A few of his basic theories are commonly known to the lay person as well.
Freud wanted to be a scientist, but he needed a substantial salary to support his large family

so he was forced to take up the practice of medicine. As a medical man he was concerned
——<eagm==—__ with the treatment and cure of mental disorders. Freud developed the theory of

psychoanalysis psychoanalysis to treat the nervous disorders of his patients. Psychoanalysis is based on the
a psychological theory of personality which states that unconscious thoughts and desires determine a
ae ° person’s attitudes and behaviours. Psychoanalysis used a variety of valuable techniques to
treatment used to ig up information from the unconscious mind. This data could then be examined and any
assist people with conflicts with the ideas could be resolved, restoring the person’s mental health. This was not
om ee a ality an easy task because many of the conflicts went back to early childhood experiences.
disorders

=O

Before we go any further, let’s clarify the terms conscious and unconscious which we
learned earlier in this lesson. We will examine them from Freud’s view. Our conscious
mind is fully aware of the circumstances of our everyday lives and makes important
decisions about appropriate behaviour we should follow. The unconscious mind
contains information, memories, and emotions that we are not aware of but they have a

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 5

ge
preconscious

the transition
area between the
conscious and
unconscious mind

Oe

6

direct affect on our lives just the same. Sometimes the affect of data from the
unconscious mind can be very disturbing. Freud believed that the unconscious mind
was much larger in scope than the conscious mind. To compare the conscious and
unconscious mind, he used the iceberg analogy. Only the tip of the iceberg shows
above the surface of the water; underneath and out of sight is a huge expanse of ice.
That’s what makes an iceberg so dangerous; its great bulk is not visible. Likewise, the
conscious mind represents only a small part of the person as well.

Don’t confuse Freud’s ideas of the unconscious mind with the serious medical
condition of being unconscious or in a coma. Freud believed the mind of every
individual has an unconscious component.

Between the conscious and the unconscious mind was a transition zone known as the
preconscious. Generally a person is not fully aware of information in the preconscious,
but with some effort and concentration, they may be able to become aware of it. For
example, what did you do last Thursday? You may not remember immediately. But if
you are able to work backward day by day, and are given a few clues to help you out,
you might be able to recall a lot of the information. This data is stored in the
preconscious. Sometimes a revelation about some information you have taken for
granted might hit you out of the blue. You realize that you have known that information
for a long time, but you have never taken the care to acknowledge it and examine it.
For example, your little nephew says he doesn’t like playing in the back yard, but
suddenly you realize it is because he is terrified of big dogs and the neighbours own a
large dog. All kinds of data is stored in the preconscious mind, and can be moved into
the conscious mind with a little effort.

Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

=e
hypnosis — a
deeply relaxed,
drowsy state of
mind in which the
person is open to
suggestions

it

=e
free association

—a psychological
technique where
the person “talks
out” problems
with the therapist
—aii

Now we are faced with a tough question: How can the unconscious mind be
investigated and treated for mental disorders if we do not understand what is in the
unconscious mind? One of the first methods Freud used was hypnosis, which is like
an artificially induced state of sleep in which the person’s eyes are closed and he or
she is deeply relaxed. In the drowsy state of hypnosis, many forgotten memories come
back to the person. Another interesting point is that a person usually maintains very
strict controls on what is remembered or brought into the conscious mind as a means
of protection from bad memories. However, when the person is relaxed through
hypnosis, unconscious wishes and memories are more easily brought forward.

Eventually Freud decided to explore other methods for getting to the unconscious
mind. One technique he encouraged his patients to use was [ree association.
This is also known as “talking out” because

the patient relaxed and discussed personal
problems while Freud listened and tried to find
a pattern in what was said. Word association

is used by psychologists to get the patient
through obstacles blocking the memory. The
psychologist says a series of words and watches
for unusual responses that indicates problem
areas. For example, bedtime — punishment
would be considered an abnormal grouping of
ideas. Sometimes with free association, Freud
was able to go back to some of the patient’s
earliest memories that led him to clues pointing
to the person’s maladjustments later in life. Free
association proved to be a useful instrument

for psychoanalysis or treating disorders of

the unconscious mind. Freud believed that
practically all neurotic disturbances had their
origin in some sexual experience that often
occurred very early in life, sometimes even in
infancy.

Freud eventually turned to a third method of gaining information from the
unconscious mind — dream interpretation. People are usually fascinated with dreams
and what they may mean, so dreams are the topic of the final, special section of this
lesson.

Interpretation of Dreams was a popular book written by Freud in 1900. This is
considered to be one of the great publications of modern times. It is much more than
just a study of dreams; the book is also about the dynamics of the human mind.

General Psychology 20 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 7

Why were dreams considered so important? Freud argued that there is a reasonable
cause and a valid explanation for all dreams; they are not just night-time fantasies.
People experience a variety of sensations during the course of their everyday lives such
as pain, noise, cold, and/or hunger. The dream has its origins in the person’s mind,
particularly in the emotions. When the person is in the relaxed state of sleep, all of the
ideas and emotions experienced during the day’s activities are expressed in dreams.
According to Freud, every dream results from an unfulfilled wish of some kind. We do
not always dream what we wish for in a literal or actual sense; rather, our dreams are
usually disguised in some form or another. Dreams are often altered in some way if we
believe our real wishes are either too evil or too naughty to be acceptable to us.

For example, you might get into an argument with a parent or a friend. You feel guilty
about the situation. Since this confrontation is full of emotional turmoil, you may dream
about it. Instead of being angry with the person (in your dreams), you see them caught
up in an embarrassing but harmless situation in order to pay them back for arguing with
you.

Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

==
id — the part of
the personality
which focu
satisfying basic
needs and

es on

receiving
pleasure

libido — the
energy within the
id which gives
attention to the
goals of attaining
pleasure

ete

===
ego — the part of
the personality
which acts as the
mediator between
the id, superego,
and external
reality

ee <<<((0))>

Sigmund Freud’s Theories of Personality

Besides the study of dreams, Freud made a valuable contribution to the study of human
behaviour by outlining his theory of personality. According to Freud, the total personality has
three main areas: the id, the ego and the superego.

The ic is the primary source of psychic energy which gives us our drive to achieve our
goals, to meet our basic needs, and to survive. The id is more closely in touch with the body
and its needs than it is with the outside world. The energy within the id which is the life
instincts or the forces which drive a person to fill positive stimulation is the libido. The libido
focuses on the pleasure principle to reduce tension in our lives and give us satisfaction
through basic body requirements like eating, eliminating body wastes, and sexual
gratification.

The id is both powerful and
impulsive in nature. For
example, you may observe the
behaviour of a young child who
wants a candy or a cookie. The
infant will reach out for it and
cry if the treat is not given
immediately. The id is strongly
asserting its demands. As the
individual matures and the
personality develops, some of
the energy originating in the id
is diverted into the two other
systems of the personality—the
ego and superego.

The ego controls and governs the id and the superego. It is the mediator or the go-between
whose goal is the smooth functioning of all parts of the personality. Using thought and
reason, the ego develops a plan of action with the best interests of the total personality in
mind. The ego not only attempts to balance the demands of the id and superego, but also
takes into account the realities of the external world. For example, you are hungry and pass
through the candy section of your grocery store. The id says: “Buy a chocolate bar and eat
itnow; they taste delicious.” The superego or your conscience says: “Remember you’re on
adiet and you promised yourself you wouldn’t break it.” While this argument is going on
within your body and mind, you note the facts of external reality: It is an hour and a half
before supper which is a long time to wait, yet you don’t want to spoil your appetite. The
ego sorts through all this data and comes up with a solution: Buy some sweet grapes which
will satisfy your hunger cravings without doing a lot of damage. Maybe from that simple
example you can appreciate the work of the ego.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 9

=e
superego — the
part of the
personality which
gives moral
direction to the
person like the
conscience

se

The superego is much the same as our conscience, telling us what is right and wrong.
The superego strives for perfection or the ideal type of behaviour. During Freud’s time,
many people believed the conscience was implanted by God. Freud argued that the
superego forms around the ideas that one’s parents consider to be morally good and
bad. There are two very strong forces at
work urging the person to behave ina
certain way. One is fear of punishment
for “bad” behaviour and the other is
desire to gain approval for “good”
behaviour. For example, the young child
remembers that Mommy gets upset when
she pulls up flowers from the garden.
Even though the flowers are very pretty
and she is tempted to pick them, her
superego reminds her not to do this. The
superego’s purpose is to regulate and
control impulses that could be dangerous
to society. You can probably think of
some examples of the safeguards that the
superego provides for the safety of all
citizens. People who engage in horrible
crimes have a superego that isn’t
functioning or perhaps it does not exist at
all for that person.

When a person is young, all parts of the personality—the id, ego, and superego—are
struggling for control. As a person becomes older, the three parts of the personality work
together more smoothly as a team and become more integrated. Each part of the personality
is important and has a critical job to do to make the individual a well adjusted member of
society.

In summary, Freud wrote extensively on dreams, the personality, stages of human
development and defense mechanisms which will be one of the topics later in this
course. Without covering all of Freud’s theories, the ones we have chosen give a clear
indication of the magnitude of Freud’s contribution in the field of psychology.

10 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

—

extravert —a

person who is self

confident, people-
oriented,
outgoing

introvert — a
person who is
quiet, thoughtful,
inner-directed

—a De

Are You an Extravert or Introvert?

A Swiss psychiatrist, Carl Jung, was an associate of Sigmund Freud at one time. They
parted company because of certain disagreements over key theories. He popularized the
terms extravert and introvert. Let’s pause to talk about a few of the characteristics
associated with each term.

Extravert — social, outgoing, gregarious, “the life
of the party”

When stress occurs, the extravert automatically
turns to others for support. The extravert laughs
frequently and finds it easy to make friends. Given
the choice of presenting an oral report in front
of the class or focusing on a detailed written
report, the extravert has no hesitation in
choosing the oral report.

Introvert — thoughtful, shy ,withdrawn, caught
up in self discovery and personal growth

When stress occurs, the introvert finds a place
away from others to think things through. The
introvert tends to daydream, worries about the
opinions of others and is easily hurt by the rude
actions of others. The introvert may enjoy
reading a book or listening to music alone.

Many people say, “I’m a little bit of both”. This is usually true. On some occasions a
person wants to be with others and have fun; at other times the person doesn’t mind
having some quiet time. However, Carl Jung maintained that when one of the choices
becomes dominant and habitual for the person, they are either an extravert or an
introvert. Nine times out of ten, would you rather read a book or be the life of the
party? Which choices tend to be more dominant (that’s the key word)? Those people
who are truly a balance of both choices are call ambiverts.

Like Freud, Jung spent a great deal of time studying the unconscious mind. However
these great psychologists had differing views on the factors that determine human
behaviour. Freud narrowed it down to early childhood experiences. Jung emphasized
that goals play an important role in directing human behaviour.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 11

Jung believed the unconscious mind could be divided into the personal unconscious
and the collective unconscious. The personal unconscious comes from our own past
experiences that we were once aware of, but have now been forgotten. For example,
any basic habit you learned in early childhood has now become automatic for you to do and
you don’t have to consciously remember it step by step every time you do it. One example
would be brushing your hair.

The collective unconscious is the second category. This is a powerful region of the
mind and contains all the memories from our earliest ancestors. The collective
unconscious is the same for everyone throughout the world; it is universal. The
collective unconscious refers to human understandings common to all mankind because
of our similar experiences. For example, people from all corners of the world would be
afraid of a loud thundering noise and a sudden flash of intense light because that
usually means personal danger. It is also interesting to note that many cultures around
the world have similar myths and stories. One lady working with a group of Caribbean
natives, as well as a group of Inuit people in the north, discovered they had an
interesting and unusual myth about the moon, and both stories were almost identical.

12 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Behaviourism

Freud and Jung were two important European psychologists. In America there were
many scientists who were dissatisfied with the general aims and methods of psychology.
They had little faith in the methods used by psychoanalytic psychologists involving the
gathering of data through hypnosis, dream interpretation, and asking patients to reflect on
their early childhood experiences. They believed the importance of the unconscious mind
had been greatly exaggerated.

The Behaviourist believed that a person’s inner feelings and attitudes can only be
known to the individual in a personal way. They believed the only elements about the
individual that can be known by the scientists conducting studies is the person’s
outward behaviour which can be accurately measured and observed. Therefore the
Behaviourist wanted to focus on behaviour and not one’s inner feelings and memories.
They believed that was the precise, scientific way of studying psychology.

Let’s look at an example to distinguish the approaches used by a psychoanalytic or
Freudian psychologist and a Behaviourist. The psychologist wants to study the emotion
of fear. For example, the Freudian would attempt to discover what original childhood
experience initiated the fear and how it is associated with present day experiences. For
example, the Behaviourist would be concerned with measuring body reactions when
the emotion of fear is present such as: increased pulse rate, muscle tension, and to what
extent the person perspires. The Behaviourist would not give a subjective report on
how an individual actually feels when afraid. In other words, the Behaviourist would
simply study behaviour in a clinical, scientific way. The Behaviourist avoids the use of
the word mind as much as possible.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 13

—=E_=—
tabula rasa — the
theory that a
newborn baby has
no previous
thoughts or
experiences prior
to birth

Oe

What causes people to behave as they do?
According to the Behaviourist, a great deal
of a youngster’s actions are shaped by the
behaviour of those around him. The child
often imitates the actions of others. The
youngster will then decide whether these
responses will become a permanent part of
the child’s approach to life depending on
whether there is a reward or punishment for
such behaviour. Therefore a person is
programmed by environmental forces. Ifa
reward is offered repeatedly for a behaviour,
the individual will retain that response. If
punishment is used, the person will quickly
abandon the behaviour that leads to
punishment. For example, we often see
these Behaviourist principles in use when r
someone is training an animal by offeringa ‘s
reward or intervening with punishment | 4 ’

depending on the behaviour.

Rewards and punishments people give to each other are not always something obvious
like money and gifts or a slap or scolding. A subtle yet powerful reward is a smile or a
nod; a frown or complete silence are subtle forms of punishment. The next time you
encounter a long-winded companion, remain perfectly silent for one full minute and
observe how this will alter the person’s behaviour.

Some critics believed that the methods of the Behaviourist leaned so strongly on
physiology that their approach could hardly be classified as psychological. But the
Behaviourist has made significant contributions to child psychology and the study of
learning.

John Watson was an early leader in Behaviourist movement in psychology. He was an
extreme environmentalist which means he believed that human character, ability and
intelligence are an outcome of our circumstances in life. Human character is not inborn
or innate. This notion is linked to the tabula rasa theory that the human being is a
blank or clean slate at birth until we begin recording our life experiences. Another
comparison is that we are like an unused videotape when we are first born until we
begin noticing and recording what is happening to us.

14 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

What were some of Watson’s other theories? He stated that human beings have no
instincts and no inherited temperaments or talents. There are only three innate or inborn
emotional responses— fear, rage, and love. Other emotions are conditioned responses,
that is, these emotions have been learned by programming the individual. Our habits are
learned through conditioning and so is our speech which is the basis of our thinking.
The combination of all of the individual’s habits leads to personality.

One of Watson’s key concepts was that behaviour was formed by the S-R or stimulus-
response connection. An individual is exposed to a certain stimulus and responds with
certain muscular contractions or glandular discharges. For example, when driving a car
you come to an intersection with a red light (stimulus). Your automatic reaction is to
take your foot off the gas and put it on the brake (response).

In 1920 John B. Watson conducted an interesting experiment with a little boy named Albert,
a white rat, and a loud noise. Albert was a little boy who had no fear of most things in his
environment. Watson wanted to find out if fears were learnable instead of being instinctive
as was traditionally thought. Albert was allowed to play with a variety of objects and
animals (the white rat, a dog, wool, etc....) and he had no fear or adverse reactions to
any of them. Watson then hit a steel bar whenever Albert would reach out to pet the rat.
This startled Albert who began to cry (loud noises are often associated with danger).
From then on the loud noise was paired with the white rat and Albert always had a
strong negative response. Eventually, the white rat was able to elicit a negative response
from Albert even without the loud noise. Watson then introduced other objects. Albert
did not cry when blocks or rubber balls were placed in front of him but Albert did cry
when he saw a white rabbit. In fact, Albert generalized his fear to many white furry
objects including white fur coats, cotton wool, and even a Santa Claus beard.

In a way the experiment was a success because Watson had successfully demonstrated that
fears could be conditioned or learned. On the day Watson was to attempt to “undo” the
learned fear of white furry objects, Albert was taken from the hospital. We know now
that conditioning principles can be used to remove conditioned fears but we do not
know what became of poor Albert.

Besides his work with little Albert, Watson was
involved in other experimental studies with
children. Watson was soon regarded as an
expert on child rearing and child care. His
advice was sought by many parents. Because of
his Behaviourist philosophy on programming
behaviour, he had rather strict and disciplined
views on child care.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 15

Humanistic Theories

The psychologists in this group believed that under the right circumstances people will
become happy, creative individuals who seek growth experiences. People are not evil by
nature, the Humanists stated. Our inner nature is good and pulls us toward positive
experiences that help us to meet our needs and improve our own lives and those of others.

One very popular psychologist in the Humanistic field was Abraham Maslow. According
to Maslow, each person follows an identical blueprint or pattern in order to satisfy physical
and psychological needs. He arranged human needs in a pyramid shape because the lowest
sections of the pyramid contain needs required by every human being in order to survive.
Each category of needs becomes more difficult to attain, but at the same time it is more
satisfying from the standpoint of personal growth. The needs at the bottom of the pyramid
(food, water, air, warmth) are physiological needs that focus on the comfort and survival of
the body. The lower needs must be satisfied first to some degree before the person can
focus attention on the satisfaction of the next needs on the list.

Every human being has the same built-in pattern that is followed to satisfy needs. There
are two important principles to remember when studying the pyramid. First, each need
does not have to be satisfied 100% before a person becomes challenged by the next
level of needs. For example, a person requires food for survival before thinking of
safety and security. The individual can still be a little hungry, but be on the lookout for
ways to meet security or even belonging needs. A second principle is that each person
has a different threshold or capacity before deciding the particular need has been
satisfied. For example, one individual might need a great deal of love and reassurances
from family and friends before the need for social approval is satisfactorily fulfilled.
The next person may be very independent requiring very little approval from others to
satisfy social needs.

16 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

self-actualization
total fulfillment
as a human being

ee <«<((0))

WES ReKG Hierarchy of Needs

Self
/Actualization

+ perfection
+ individuality

+ self-sufficiency

+ meaningfulness
Growth Needs ¢

(also called
Higher needs)

Aesthetic Needs

+truth + beauty + order
goodness justice - richness

Cognitive Needs
+ knowledge « symmetry

Esteem Needs
+ self esteem - esteem from others \
Belongingness & Love Needs
Basic Needs CGEEpIETED eGicsilan
(also called / Safety Needs \
Deficit Needs) + security

Physiological Needs
+ food + air + water

Maslow’s pyramid is sometimes referred to the hierarchy of needs because people progress
from one level of needs to the next in a predictable, orderly fashion. A person cannot decide
to select a level at random and concentrate on those needs before looking after the needs at
the lower levels; more basic needs must be satisfied first, at least to some degree. Most of
the categories in Maslow’s pyramid are fairly self-explanatory except for se|!-
actualization. The term means total fulfillment as a human being; being aware of one’s
potential and goals and reaching out to satisfy them. Self-actualization means using your
talents and feeling good about yourself. It means seeing yourself as a good, honest person
who has compassion for others. It means having a desire to learn and understand new ideas
just for the satisfaction it brings. Self-actualization means enjoying and cultivating beauty in
our surroundings (aesthetic needs).

Maslow spoke of self-actualization in glowing terms using some of these descriptions:
honesty, truth, beauty, uniqueness, humour, justice, fairness, gaiety, benevolence,
individuality, exuberance, spontaneity, and self determination. Unfortunately, not every
person will experience the joy of self-actualization. Other people will reach self-
actualization only for a certain short period of their lives. What well known people are
thought to have been self-actualizing? A few examples are: Mother Theresa, Terry Fox,
and Mahatma Gandhi. But a self-actualizing person can also be your father, your aunt,
or one of your close friends who has high principles and the strong will to make life
better for themselves and for others.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 17

==
self-concept — the
attitudes and
impressions the
individual has of
himself or herself
—< Oe

=e
eclectic approach
an approach
that involves
selecting what is
perceived to be
the best ideas and
doctrines from a
variety of servic

ce

Another Humanistic psychologist who deserves mention is Carl Rogers. He believed
people have the power to form their own identity and not be shaped by the outside
influences and expectations of others. One of the key ideas in Carl Rogers’ theory was the
self-concept. The self concept involves the attitudes and opinions people form about
themselves. Personal feelings and emotions are also part of the self-concept. The self-
concept has so much influence that a person tends to behave in ways that agree with the
self-concept. What happens when one’s self-concept is out of tune with reality? One
solution is to look for an excuse to explain the difference. Another is to alter your self-
concept so it is more in tune with the facts. Will the self-concept change? Hopefully it will as
the person matures, has new experiences, undergoes physical changes with age, and
develops new knowledge. The ideal situation is to have a self-concept that is both positive
and at the same time realistic.

The Eclectic View

Which school of thought in psychology have you decided makes the most sense? That
might be a difficult choice. Some people feel more comfortable with an eclectic
approach. What does that mean? The eclectic approach to forming a theory involves
selecting what is perceived to be the best ideas and doctrines from a variety of sources.
But the eclectic process is not a haphazard one whereby incompatible ideas are
aimlessly picked from here and there and are thrown together. Facts favouring a certain
set of principles may be chosen, and contradictory material will not be accepted so that
the final result is an orderly and unified theory. One of the main values of eclecticism is
that it fosters a flexible and open-minded approach to new ideas. The eclectic view
allows a person to review and modify the principles and facts of the theory they have
chosen in light of new evidence.

Sleep and Dreams
Many hours of our lives are spent sleeping. It is much more than just a passive activity

we engage in once a day. Sleep might be boring, but the dreams we have while
sleeping certainly aren’t! Freud found them amazing, and that interest continues.

18 Section One: Psychology - A Look Into The Past ADLC Geneyral Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Sleep

Do people really need 8 hours of sleep a night? Some do need that length of time;
others can get by on 5 or 6 hours, while some people require as much as 9 or 10 hours.

Why is sleep necessary? One research compared
the brain to a computer which stores our
memory banks. Computers need to be shut
down or taken “off line” occasionally
and so does the brain in order to sort
through the events of the day and
recharge the memory banks. Studies
of the brain indicate that while a
person is awake, many nerve
impulses pass continuously through
the nervous system. When the person
is asleep, far fewer impulses are
recorded. Sleep helps the body build
resistance to stress and strengthens the
immune system. Lack of sleep can lead to a
number of consequences including: anxiety,
depression, problems with concentration and
memory, poor performance at tasks, accidents, increased
illness, and even personality disturbances.

Sleep may seem like an uneventful process where nothing happens, however, people
do not sleep uninterruptedly throughout the night. Psychologists speak of five stages of
sleep. Sleep occurs in cycles, but the pattern of these cycles varies not only for the same
individual from one night to the next, but also from one individual to another. These
stages can be characterized as follows:

* Stage one: also characterized as light sleep this is the stage where a person drifts
in and out of sleep and can be awakened quite easily. Eye movement slows
down and muscles start to relax. Some people awakened during this stage can
recall seeing some images. Many also experience sudden muscle contractions
accompanied by the feeling that they are falling. Their bodies start or make a
jump, waking the person up.

¢ Stage two: during this stage our eye movements stop and our brain waves show
a pattern that is much slower than when we are awake. Occasionally a rapid, fast
burst of brainwave activity will occur for a brief period of time.

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 19

* Stage three: (sometimes referred to as deep sleep) During this stage our brain

(0) aa
insomnia — the
inability to fall
asleep

waves become even slower and a pattern of delta waves occur with the
occasional burst of smaller, faster waves. During this stage people are very
difficult to wake up. When they are awakened, they feel disoriented and groggy.
They show no eye movement or muscle activity. This is the stage when people
experience night terrors, bed-wetting and sleep walking.

Stage four: (also sometimes referred to as deep sleep) During this stage the brain
produces delta waves almost exclusively. All the effects that occur during stage
three occur during this stage as well; the only difference is the absence of the fast
bursts of waves.

REM sleep (Stage five): during this stage our body functions speed up. Our
breathing becomes more rapid, irregular, and shallow, and our eyes move around
rapidly in all directions. Our arm and leg muscles become paralyzed, and our
heart rate increases, and our blood pressure rises. This is the stage where
dreaming occurs. The amount of time a person spends in REM sleep depends on
the person’s age. A baby spends 50% of its sleep in REM sleep, a young adult
spends 20% of sleep time in REM sleep and a elderly person spends 15% of sleep
time in REM sleep.

Many individuals suffer from sleep disorders. For example, there are more than 80

Om different sleep-wake disorders under the broad heading insomnia. There are almost as
many different remedies to correct it.

Here are a few common-sense tips:

try to retain a similar sleep pattern on the weekend as you do throughout the
week

drink a glass of milk; it contains tryptophan, a substance to promote sleep

if you can’t fall asleep within 15 minutes of going to bed, get up and do
something until you are more tired or more relaxed

learn to relax at bedtime; meditate or listen to “sleep tapes”

don’t get into the habit of taking medication to help you sleep; drugs cause a
person to fall into a deep, unnatural sleep without dreaming

if problems persist, keep a sleep diary recording times you go to bed, wake up,
and catnaps you take during the day

20 Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)

Sweet Dreams

People need to dream. Sleep researchers tell us that
during dream sleep the brain restores a chemical
depleted during the day which we need to focus our
attention and to think logically. It has been found
that those deprived of dreams have temporary
changes in behaviour during the waking hours, such
as greater irritability, difficulty in concentrating, and
some memory lapses. These changes disappear
when the subjects are allowed to sleep undisturbed,
during which time they dream more frequently.

How do you know when a sleeping person is having dreams? If you closely observe a
person in the deeper sleep cycles, you may notice their eyes are fluttering and moving from
side to side. This phenomenon is known as rapid eye movements or REMs. The average
dream is about 25 minutes in length. Dreams can be as short as a few minutes or last for
over an hour. Some people say they don’t dream at all which means they don’t remember
their dreams. People are sometimes disturbed or even embarrassed by their dreams.
Most people will admit that even though dreams vary greatly from one episode to the
next, they have a recurring dream that repeats itself from time to time.

Sigmund Freud called dreams the royal road to the unconscious mind. Carl Jung
believed that dreams speak to us through the symbols they portray. Some people
attempt to advise a person what each dream event or dream symbol means. However, it
is best to remember that your dreams are your unconscious mind speaking to you.
Therefore, if you want to gain a clear understanding of what your dreams mean, you
will have to learn to interpret your own dream symbols that relate to your own personal
life situation. Many people believe dreams are just a lot of nonsense images that flicker
across your mind during sleep. But if you want to gain a better understanding of your
dreams, here are some tips:

* before you go to sleep, spend a couple of minutes thinking about dreams and tell
yourself you want to remember them

* keep a notebook close to your bed, and record what you remember of your
dreams as soon as you awake (delays mean you will forget them)

* record the date of each dream

* describe your feelings and the emotions of others in the dream; often while in the
process of writing down a dream sequence, a flash of insight occurs and you will
recognize the significance of the message

* watch for repetitions in the material which may indicate an important idea for you
to recognize and accept

* the more you practise dream remembrance and analysis, the more comfortable
and competent you will become in deciphering the rich material of your dreams!

ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003) Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past 21

22

Summary

So Lesson | draws to a close. Were you overwhelmed by the amount of material and
the number of different ideas presented? Don’t dismay! You will likely find future
lessons less hectic. If you have managed to understand the main ideas in the lesson
notes and are ready to tackle some assignments, congratulations on your endurance!

To summarize:

¢ Psychology is the science of human behaviour.

¢ The goals of psychology are to observe and record facts, to explain data,
and to make reasonable predictions about future behaviour.

¢ The first laboratory started by Wilhelm Wundt gave psychology status and
recognition as a science.

¢ Sigmund Freud recognized the importance of the unconscious mind and
studied it through hypnosis, free association, and dream interpretation.

¢ Freud believed the personality was composed of three main areas—the id,
the ego, and the superego.

* Carl Jung popularized the terms introvert and extravert; he believed
people have both a personal and a collective unconscious.

¢ The Behaviourists believed it was only valid to measure outward,
observable behaviour; a person is programmed by responding to a certain
stimulus.

« Abraham Maslow was a Humanist who described a pyramid of human
needs.

¢ Aneclectic view takes bits and pieces from a number of theories.

* Sleep and dreams are both important in order to be healthy.

Turn to Assignment Booklet 1 and complete the assignments for this lesson.

Section One: Psychology — A Look Into The Past ADLC General Psychology 20 (November 2003)
