Connections
Social and Environmental Contexts
Social and Environmental Contexts
Chapter 14  The Continuance of Human Life • MHR  501
Examining the Evidence
Substances that interfere with the normal functions of 
hormones are called endocrine disruptors. These chemicals 
upset the growth, development, and reproduction of 
organisms by mimicking natural hormones or by blocking 
their effects. For example, when ﬁ sh populations are 
exposed to reproductive endocrine disruptors, the sexual 
organs of young males fail to fully develop. In extreme 
cases, the males produce eggs! Both effects are examples 
of feminization. Endocrine disruptors that mimic 
estrogen can cause feminization. Substances that block 
the action of male reproductive hormones can also have 
feminizing effects.
 
While the effects of known endocrine disruptors can 
be demonstrated in a laboratory, it is not always easy to 
assess their impact in the environment. One problem is 
that endocrine disruptors tend to be diluted in lakes and 
rivers. Even so, scientists have observed effects such as the 
feminization of ﬁ sh near sewage discharge sites. Scientists 
have also observed impaired reproduction and 
development of ﬁ sh near pulp and paper mills. As 
shown in the table, sewage and mill wastes both contain 
endocrine disruptors. Even treated sewage contains 
obvious endocrine disruptors such as synthetic estrogen 
from birth control pills.
 
Are estrogen disruptors to blame for the increase in 
abnormalities in frogs in some regions and the decrease 
in amphibians worldwide? Why do some female black 
bears and polar bears develop male sexual traits? It could 
be that increased exposure to UV light is harming 
Many cosmetics—including some, but not all, brands of nail 
polish—contain endocrine-disrupting chemicals in amounts 
that are comparable to, and sometimes greater than, hormone 
levels in the human body. Should this be cause for concern?
amphibians, and that some bears simply inherit the trait 
of showing both male and female sexual characteristics.
Selected Products Containing Endocrine Disruptors 
Source/Product
Endocrine Disruptors
ﬂ ame retardants
polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
(PBDEs)
paint (for ships’ hulls)
tributyltin
pesticides
DDT, lindane, permethrin
soft plastics
phthalates
pulp and paper mill efﬂ uent
phytoestrogens
perfumes and soaps
polycyclic musks
shampoo and other cosmetics
phthalates
Assessing the Risks 
If endocrine disruptors in the environment are affecting 
wild animals, are they also affecting people? Scientists 
and representatives of industrial manufacturers continue 
to debate whether these chemicals pose a health risk to 
humans. There is evidence that endocrine disruptors are 
leading to lower sperm counts, reduced fertility in both 
men and women, and increased rates of certain types of 
cancers. Some studies have suggested a link between 
endocrine disruptors and learning and behaviour problems 
in children. To date, however, direct (causal) links 
between environmental exposure to endocrine disruptors 
and human health effects have not been established. 
Continued research that includes the cooperation of 
industry and ﬁ nancial support of governments is 
necessary to identify and mediate the risks that these 
chemicals pose to the environment and organisms.
• • •
 1. Should a potential endocrine disruptor be considered 
“guilty until proven innocent” or “innocent until 
proven guilty” before being put on the market? 
Justify your response.
 2. What would you need to know to link a particular 
substance to speciﬁ c endocrine disrupting effects in 
a population, such as unusually high cancer rates?
Endocrine Disruptors in the Environment
Hormones inﬂ uence nearly all aspects of the body processes in animals, notably 
cellular development, growth, and reproduction. Thus, when people noticed that 
animals in areas that are contaminated by pollutants began to exhibit certain types 
of abnormalities, scientists began to wonder if there might be a link between certain 
pollutants and endocrine effects on body systems.
