

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /1 
 
  
 
 
 
PROGRAM RATIONALE AND 
PHILOSOPHY 
 
Science    programs    provide    opportunities    for    
students  to  develop  the  knowledge,  skills  and  
attitudes  they  need  to  become  productive  and  
responsible  members  of  society.    The  programs  
also   allow   students   to   explore   interests   and   
prepare    for    further    education    and    careers.        
Students  graduating  from  Alberta  schools  require  
the scientific and related technological knowledge 
and skills that will enable them to understand and 
interpret  their  world.    They  also  need  to  develop 
attitudes   that   will   motivate   them   to   use   their   
knowledge and skills in a responsible manner.   
 
To become scientifically literate,  students  need  to  
develop    a    knowledge    of    science    and    its    
relationship  to  technologies  and  society.    They  
also   need   to   develop   the   broad-based   skills   
required   to   identify   and   analyze   problems;   to   
explore  and  test  solutions;  and  to  seek,  interpret  
and evaluate information.  To ensure relevance to 
students  as  well  as  to  societal  needs,  a  science  
program  must  present  science  in  a meaningful 
context—providing  opportunities  for  students  to  
explore the process of science, its applications and 
implications, and to examine related technological 
problems   and   issues.      By   doing   so,   students   
become aware of the role of science in responding 
to social and cultural change and in meeting needs 
for   a   sustainable   environment,   economy   and   
society. 
 
 
Program Vision 
 
The  secondary  science  program  is  guided  by  the  
vision  that  all  students,  regardless  of  gender  or  
cultural  background,  are  given  the  opportunity  to  
develop  scientific  literacy.    The  goal  of  scientific  
literacy     is     to     develop     in     students     the     
science-related knowledge, skills and attitudes that 
they  need  to  solve  problems  and  make  decisions  
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  help  students  become  
lifelong   learners   who   maintain   their   sense   of   
wonder about the world around them. 
 
Diverse  learning  experiences  within  the  science  
program  provide  students  with  opportunities  to  
explore,       analyze       and       appreciate       the       
interrelationships    among    science,    technology, 
society   and   the   environment   and   to   develop   
understandings that will affect their personal lives, 
their careers and their futures. 
 
BIOLOGY 20–30 
Program of Studies 
2007 (Updated 2014)   
Updates 
Minor revisions were made in 2014 and are 
described in 2014 Summary of Updates
. 
 

2/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Goals 
 
The    following    goals    for    Canadian    science    
education,  developed  in  the  Common  Framework  
of    Science    Learning    Outcomes    K to    12:    
Pan-Canadian   Protocol   for   Collaboration   on   
School  Curriculum  (1997),  are  addressed  through  
the  Alberta  science  program.    Science  education  
will: 
• encourage   students   at   all   grade   levels   to   
develop   a   critical   sense   of   wonder   and   
curiosity  about  scientific  and  technological  
endeavours 
• enable students to use science and technology 
to acquire new knowledge and solve problems 
so  that  they  may  improve  the  quality  of  their  
lives and the lives of others 
• prepare     students     to     critically     address     
science-related societal, economic, ethical and 
environmental issues 
• provide  students  with  a  foundation  in  science  
that  creates  opportunities  for  them  to  pursue  
progressively  higher  levels  of  study,  prepares  
them   for   science-related   occupations   and   
engages    them    in    science-related    hobbies    
appropriate to their interests and abilities 
• develop  in  students  of  varying  aptitudes  and  
interests a knowledge of the wide spectrum of 
careers  related  to  science,  technology  and  the  
environment. 
 
Aboriginal Perspectives 
 
Courses   in   the   senior   high   school   sciences   
incorporate  Aboriginal  perspectives  in  order  to  
develop,  in  all  students,  an  appreciation  of  the  
cultural   diversity   and   achievements   of   First   
Nations,  Métis  and  Inuit  (FNMI)  peoples.    These  
courses are designed to: 
• acknowledge  the  contributions  of  Aboriginal  
peoples to understandings of the natural world 
• support   relational   thinking   by   integrating   
learning from various disciplines of science 
• develop     the     concept     of     humankind’s     
connectivity to the natural world and foster an 
appreciation  for  the  importance  of  caring  for  
the environment 
• foster the development of positive attitudes by 
providing   experiences   that   encourage   all   
students to feel confident about their ability to 
succeed in science. 
 
Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) 
 
Selected    curriculum    outcomes    from    Alberta    
Education’s    Information    and    Communication    
Technology  (ICT)  Program  of  Studies  are  infused  
throughout  the  20-level  and  30-level  sciences  so  
that  students  will  develop  a  broad  perspective  on  
the  nature  of  technology,  learn  how  to  use  and  
apply  a  variety  of  technologies,  and  consider  the  
impact  of  ICT  on  individuals  and  society.    The  
infusion  of  ICT  outcomes  supports  and  reinforces  
the  understandings  and  abilities  that  students  are  
expected to develop within Foundation 3 (Science, 
Technology   and   Society)   and   Foundation   4   
(Skills)  of  these  courses.    Effective,  efficient  and  
ethical application of ICT outcomes contributes to 
the program vision. 
 
Infusion   of   ICT   outcomes   provides   learning   
opportunities for students to: 
• understand the nature of technology and apply 
terminology appropriately 
• use equipment carefully and share limited ICT 
resources 
• use technology in an ethical manner, including 
respecting  the  ownership  of  information  and  
digital resources and citing electronic sources 
• use   technology   safely,   including   applying   
ergonomic  principles  and  appropriate  safety  
procedures 
• use  the  Internet  safely,  including  protecting  
personal   information   and   avoiding   contact   
with strangers 
• use     technology     appropriately,     including     
following     communication     etiquette     and     
respecting the privacy of others. 
 

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /3 
PROGRAM FOUNDATIONS 
 
To support the development of scientific literacy, a science program must provide learning experiences 
that address critical aspects of science and its application.  These foundations provide a general direction 
for the program and identify the major components of its structure. 
 
 
   
Program Rationale and Philosophy 
   
     
↓ 
     
           
Foundation 1  Foundation 2  Foundation 3  Foundation 4 
           
ATTITUDES 
 
KNOWLEDGE 
 
SCIENCE, 
TECHNOLOGY 
AND SOCIETY 
 
SKILLS 
Interest in Science 
Mutual Respect 
Scientific Inquiry 
Collaboration 
Stewardship 
Safety 
 
 
↔ 
Life Science 
 
Physical Science 
 
Earth and Space Science 
 
 
 
↔ 
Nature of Science 
 
Science and 
Technology 
 
Social and 
Environmental  
Contexts  
of Science and 
Technology 
 
 
↔ 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Performing and 
Recording 
 
Analyzing and 
Interpreting 
 
Communication and 
Teamwork 
Change 
Diversity 
Energy 
Equilibrium 
Matter 
Systems 
 
 Foundation 1 
 Attitudes—Students will be encouraged to develop attitudes that support the responsible acquisition 
and  application  of  scientific  and  technological  knowledge  to  the  mutual  benefit  of  self,  society  and  
the environment. 
 
 Foundation 2 
 Knowledge—Students  will  construct knowledge  and  understandings  of  concepts  in  life  science,  
physical science and Earth and space science, and apply these understandings to interpret, integrate 
and extend their knowledge. 
 
 Foundation 3 
 Science,  Technology  and  Society  (STS)—Students  will  develop  an  understanding  of  the  nature  of  
science  and  technology,  the  relationships  between  science  and  technology,  and  the  social  and  
environmental contexts of science and technology. 
 
 Foundation 4 
 Skills—Students will develop the skills required for scientific and technological inquiry, for solving 
problems, for communicating scientific ideas and results, for working collaboratively and for making 
informed decisions. 
 

4/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Foundation 1:  Attitudes 
 
Foundation  1  is  concerned  with  the  generalized  
aspects  of  behaviour  that  are  commonly  referred  
to   as   attitudes.      Attitude   outcomes   are   of   a   
different   form   than   outcomes   for   skills   and   
knowledge:  they are exhibited in a different way, 
and    they    are    rooted    more    deeply    in    the    
experiences that students bring to school.  Attitude 
development is a lifelong process that involves the 
home,  the  school,  the  community  and  society  at  
large.  Attitudes are best shown not by the events 
of  a  particular  moment  but  by  the  pattern  of  
behaviours  over  time.    Development  of  positive  
attitudes plays an important role in student growth 
by     interacting     with     students’     intellectual     
development   and   by   creating   a   readiness   for   
responsible application of what is learned.
 
 
Interest in Science 
 
Students     will be     encouraged     to develop 
enthusiasm and continuing interest in the study of 
science. 
 
Mutual Respect 
 
Students  will be  encouraged  to appreciate  that  
scientific     understanding     evolves     from     the     
interaction    of    ideas    involving    people    with    
different views and backgrounds. 
 
Scientific Inquiry 
 
Students  will be  encouraged  to develop  attitudes  
that  support  active  inquiry,  problem  solving  and  
decision making. 
 
Collaboration 
 
Students  will be  encouraged  to develop  attitudes  
that support collaborative activity. 
 
Stewardship 
 
Students     will be     encouraged     to develop 
responsibility  in  the  application  of  science  and  
technology  in  relation  to  society  and  the  natural  
environment. 
 
Safety 
 
Students  will be  encouraged  to demonstrate  a  
concern   for   safety   in   science   and   technology   
contexts. 
 
Foundation 2:  Knowledge 
 
Foundation  2  focuses  on  the  subject  matter  of  
science,   including   the   laws,   theories,   models,   
concepts  and  principles  that  are  essential  to  an  
understanding    of    each    science    area.        For    
organizational purposes, this foundation is framed 
using widely accepted science disciplines. 
 
Life Science 
 
Life    science    deals    with    the    growth    and    
interactions     of     life     forms     within     their     
environments     in     ways     that     reflect     their     
uniqueness,    diversity,    genetic    continuity    and    
changing nature.  Life science includes such fields 
of   study   as   ecosystems,   biological   diversity,   
organisms,       cells,       biochemistry,       genetic       
engineering and biotechnology. 
 
Physical Science 
 
Physical  science,  which  encompasses  chemistry  
and physics, deals with matter, energy and forces.  
Matter  has  structure,  and  there  are  interactions  
among  its  components.    Energy  links  matter  to  
gravitational,  electromagnetic  and  nuclear  forces  
in  the  universe.    Physical  science  also  addresses  
the   conservation   laws   of   mass   and   energy,   
momentum and charge. 
 
Earth and Space Science 
 
Earth   and   space   science   brings   global   and   
universal perspectives to student knowledge.  The 
planet  Earth  exhibits  form,  structure  and  patterns  
of  change,  as  does  the  surrounding  solar  system  
and  the  physical  universe  beyond  it.    Earth  and  
space  science  includes  such  fields  of  study  as  
geology, meteorology and astronomy. 
 

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /5 
Themes   are   the   major   ideas   of   science   and   
technology  that  transcend  discipline  boundaries  
and demonstrate unity among the natural sciences.  
Six  themes  have  been  identified  for  the  senior 
high school sciences program. 
 
Change 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
How  all  natural  entities  are  modified  over  time,  
how  the  direction  of  change  might  be  predicted  
and,   in   some   instances,   how   change   can   be   
controlled. 
 
Diversity 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The  array  of  living  and  nonliving  forms  of  matter  
and  the  procedures  used  to  understand,  classify  
and distinguish these forms of matter on the basis 
of recurring patterns. 
 
Energy 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The  capacity  for  doing  work  that  drives  much  of  
what takes place in the universe through its variety 
of interconvertible forms. 
 
Equilibrium 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The  state  in  which  opposing  forces  or  processes  
balance in a static or dynamic way. 
 
Matter  
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The constituent parts, and the variety of states, of 
the material in the physical world. 
 
Systems 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The  interrelated  groups  of  things  or  events  that  
can be  defined  by  their  boundaries  and,  in  some  
instances, by their inputs and outputs. 
 
 
Foundation 3:  Science, Technology and 
Society (STS) 
 
Foundation 3 is concerned with understanding the 
scope  and  character  of  science,  its  connections  to  
technology  and  the  social  context  in  which  it  is  
developed.    The  following  is  a  brief  introduction  
to  the  major  ideas  underlying  this  component  of  
the program.   
 
Nature of Science 
 
Science provides an ordered way of learning about 
the  nature  of  things,  based  on  observation  and  
evidence.      Through   science,   we   explore   our   
environment, gather knowledge and develop ideas 
that  help  us  interpret  and  explain  what  we  see.    
Scientific   activity   provides   a   conceptual   and   
theoretical   base   that   is   used   in   predicting,   
interpreting      and      explaining      natural      and      
technological  phenomena.    Science  is  driven  by  a  
combination    of    specific    knowledge,    theory,    
observation  and  experimentation.    Science-based 
ideas  are  continually  being  tested,  modified  and  
improved   as   new   knowledge   and   explanations   
supersede existing knowledge and explanations. 
 
Science and Technology 
 
Technology  is  concerned  with  solving  practical  
problems     that     arise     from     human     needs.          
Historically,  the  development  of  technology  has  
been   strongly   linked   to   the   development   of   
science,  with  each  making  contributions  to  the  
other.  While there are important relationships and 
interdependencies,    there    are    also    important    
differences.    Whereas  the  focus  of  science  is  on  
the  development  and  verification  of  knowledge,  
the  focus  of  technology  is  on  the  development  of  
solutions, involving devices and systems that meet 
a  given  need  within  the  constraints  of  a  problem.    
The test of scientific knowledge is that it helps us 
explain,    interpret    and    predict;    the    test    of    
technology   is   that   it   works—it   enables   us   to   
achieve a given purpose. 
 

6/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Social and Environmental Contexts  
 
The   history   of   science   shows   that   scientific   
development  takes  place  within  a  social  context.    
Many examples can be used to show that cultural 
and   intellectual   traditions   have   influenced   the   
focus   and   methodologies   of   science,   and   that   
science  in  turn  has  influenced  the  wider  world  of  
ideas. 
 
Today,  research  is  often  driven  by  societal  and  
environmental needs and issues.  As technological 
solutions  have  emerged  from  previous  research, 
many  of  the  new  technologies  have  given  rise  to  
complex     social     and     environmental     issues.          
Increasingly, these issues are becoming part of the 
political  agenda.    The  potential  of  science  to  
inform    and    empower    decision    making    by    
individuals,  communities  and  society  is  central  to  
scientific literacy in a democratic society. 
 
Foundation 4:  Skills 
 
Foundation  4  is  concerned  with  the  skills  that  
students  develop  in  answering  questions,  solving  
problems  and  making  decisions.    While  these  
skills  are  not  unique  to  science,  they  play  an  
important  role  in  the  development  of  scientific  
understandings  and  in  the  application  of  science  
and technology to new situations.  Four broad skill 
areas   are   outlined   in   the   secondary   science   
program.    Each  skill  area  is  developed  at  each  
level  with  increasing  scope  and  complexity  of  
application. 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
These  are  the  skills  of  questioning,  identifying  
problems  and  developing  preliminary  ideas  and  
plans. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
These  are  the  skills  of  carrying  out  a  plan  of  
action    that    include    gathering    evidence    by    
observation   and,   in   most   cases,   manipulating   
materials and equipment. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
These are the skills of examining information and 
evidence;  of  processing  and  presenting  data  so  
that  they  can  be  interpreted;  and  of  interpreting,  
evaluating and applying the results. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
In science, as in other areas, communication skills 
are essential at every stage during which ideas are 
being  developed,  tested,  interpreted,  debated  and  
agreed upon.  Teamwork skills are also important, 
as  the  development  and  application  of  science  
ideas  are  collaborative  processes  both  in  society  
and in the classroom. 
 
 
PROGRAM ORGANIZATION 
 
Attitude Outcomes 
 
A  listing  of  Attitude  outcomes  is  included  at  the  
beginning  of  each  of  the  20-level  and  30-level 
courses   in   the   senior   high   school   sciences   
program.      These   specific   outcomes   are   to   be   
developed   throughout   the   particular   course   in   
conjunction    with    the    specific    outcomes    for    
Knowledge, STS and Skills listed within each unit 
of study. 
 
Units of Study 
 
In  the  senior  high  school  sciences  program,  four  
units  of  study  are  outlined  for  each  course.    Each  
unit  in  the  20-level  and  30-level  courses  includes  
the following components. 
 
Themes 
 
Themes   are the   major   ideas   of   science   that   
transcend topics of study. 
 
Overview 
 
The  overview  introduces  the  contents  of  the  unit  
and suggests an approach to unit development. 
 

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /7 
Focusing Questions 
 
These  questions  frame  a  context  for  introducing  
the  unit  and  suggest  a  focus  for  investigative  
activities and application of ideas by students. 
 
Key Concepts 
 
Key concepts identify major ideas to be developed 
in   the   unit.      Some   of   the   concepts   may   be   
addressed  in  additional  units  of  the  same  course,  
as well as in other courses.  The intended scope of 
treatment  of  these  concepts  is  indicated  by  the  
outcomes. 
 
Outcomes 
 
Two levels of outcomes are provided in each unit: 
• General   Outcomes:      These   are   the   major   
outcomes   in   the   unit   that   students   are   to   
demonstrate over the course of their learning.   
• Specific   Outcomes:      These   are   detailed   
outcomes  that  delineate  the  scope  of  each  
general   outcome   and   the   unit.      Specific   
outcomes       for       Knowledge;       Science,       
Technology and Society (STS); and Skills are 
identified. 
 
The  outcomes  are  numbered  for  the  purpose  of  
referencing.    This  numbering  is  not  intended  to  
imply a fixed instructional sequence. 
 
Examples 
 
Many of the outcomes are supported by examples.  
The  examples  are  written  in  italics  and  do  not  
form  part  of  the  required  program  but  are 
provided  as  an  illustration  of  how  the  outcomes  
might be developed. 
 
STS Emphases 
 
The  specific  outcomes  for  Science,  Technology  
and  Society  (STS)  and  Skills  for  each  general  
outcome  in  a  unit  include  one  of  the  following  
emphases: 
• Nature of Science 
• Science and Technology 
• Social and Environmental Contexts 
 
The   STS   emphases   provide   opportunities   for   
students  to  develop  related  concepts  and  skills  as  
outlined on pages 8 to 10. 
 
Additional Links 
 
Links to the STS emphasis frameworks (pages 8 to 
10)  are  shown  in  boldface  and  (in  parentheses)  
after specific outcomes for STS and after specific 
outcomes  or  examples  for  Skills.    Links  to  the  
Division  4  ICT  curriculum  (pages  11  to  13)  are  
shown in boldface and [in brackets] after some of 
the  specific  outcomes  and  examples  for  STS  and  
Skills.    The  STS  and  ICT  links  indicate  that  the  
concept    or    skill    from    the    STS    emphasis    
framework  or  the  Division  4  ICT  outcome  has  
been   addressed   in   the   specific   outcome   or   
example. 
 
Note:  The  listing  of  STS  and  ICT  links  is  not  
exhaustive; other links may exist. 
 
Links to Mathematics 
 
The  purpose  of  the  links  to  Mathematics  is  to  
identify  mathematical  concepts  and  skills  related  
to  science  content  in  the  science  units  of  study.  
The   mathematics   links   identify   where   similar   
concepts    and    skills    are    developed    in    the    
mathematics programs of study to support making 
connections   between   mathematics   and   science   
learning,  to  build  upon  previous  student  learning,  
and     to     identify     possible     connections     to     
mathematics      learning      that      students      may      
encounter.  These  links  do  not  represent  learning  
outcomes   for   Science   and   are   not   considered   
prerequisites for Alberta science courses. 

8/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Framework for Developing a Nature of Science Emphasis (Grades 10–12) 
 
The following concepts and skills are developed through this STS emphasis. 
Concepts (focus on how scientific knowledge is 
developed) 
Students will develop an understanding that: 
• the goal of science is knowledge about the natural world 
(NS1) 
• scientific knowledge and theories develop through 
hypotheses, the collection of evidence, investigation and 
the ability to provide explanations (NS2) 
• scientific knowledge results from peer review and 
replication of the research of others (NS3) 
• scientific knowledge is subject to change as new evidence 
becomes apparent and as laws and theories are tested and 
subsequently revised, reinforced or rejected (NS4) 
• the process of scientific investigation includes (NS5):  
− identifying the theoretical basis of the investigation 
(NS5a) 
− defining and delimiting, clearly, research questions 
or ideas to be tested (NS5b) 
− designing the investigation (NS5c) 
− evaluating and selecting means to collect and 
record evidence (NS5d) 
− carrying out the investigation (NS5e) 
− analyzing the evidence and providing explanations 
based upon scientific theories and concepts (NS5f) 
• scientific paradigms are conceptual inventions that help 
organize, interpret and explain findings (NS6) 
− Concepts, models and theories are often used in 
interpreting and explaining observations and in 
predicting future observations (NS6a) 
− Conventions of mathematics, nomenclature and 
notation provide a basis for organizing and 
communicating scientific theory, relationships and 
concepts; e.g., chemical symbols (NS6b) 
− Scientific language is precise, and specific terms 
may be used in each field of study (NS6c) 
• scientific inquiry is limited to certain questions (NS7) 
 Skills (focus on scientific inquiry) 
Initiating and Planning (IP–NS) 
Students will: 
• identify, define and delimit questions to investigate  
(IP–NS1) 
• design an experiment, identifying and controlling major 
variables (IP–NS2) 
• state a prediction and a hypothesis based on available 
evidence or background information or on a theory  
(IP–NS3) 
• evaluate and select appropriate procedures, including 
appropriate sampling procedures, and instruments for 
collecting evidence and information (IP–NS4) 
Performing and Recording (PR–NS) 
Students will: 
• research, integrate and synthesize information from 
various print and electronic sources regarding a 
scientific question (PR–NS1) 
• select and use appropriate instruments for collecting data 
effectively, safely and accurately (PR–NS2) 
• carry out procedures, controlling the major variables, 
and adapt or extend procedures where required  
(PR–NS3) 
• compile and organize findings and data by hand or 
computer, using appropriate formats such as diagrams, 
flowcharts, tables and graphs (PR–NS4) 
• apply Workplace Hazardous Materials Information 
System (WHMIS) standards to handle and dispose of 
materials (PR–NS5) 
Analyzing and Interpreting (AI–NS) 
Students will: 
• apply appropriate terminology, classification systems 
and nomenclature used in the sciences (AI–NS1) 
• interpret patterns and trends in data and predict the value 
of a variable by interpolating or extrapolating from 
graphical data or from a line of best fit (AI–NS2) 
• estimate and calculate the value of variables, compare 
theoretical and empirical values, and account for 
discrepancies (AI–NS3) 
• identify limitations of data or measurements; explain 
sources of error; and evaluate the relevance, reliability 
and adequacy of data and data collection methods  
(AI–NS4) 
• identify new questions or problems that arise from what 
was learned (AI–NS5) 
• state a conclusion, based on data obtained from 
investigations, and explain how evidence gathered 
supports or refutes a hypothesis, prediction or theory 
(AI–NS6) 
Communication and Teamwork (CT–NS) 
Students will: 
• work collaboratively to develop and carry out 
investigations (CT–NS1) 
• select and use appropriate numeric, symbolic, graphical 
and linguistic modes of representation to communicate 
findings and conclusions (CT–NS2) 
• evaluate individual and group processes used in 
planning and carrying out investigative tasks (CT–NS3) 

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /9 
Framework for Developing a Science and Technology Emphasis (Grades 10–12) 
 
The following concepts and skills are developed through this STS emphasis. 
Concepts (focus on the interrelationship of 
science and technology) 
Students will develop an understanding that: 
• the goal of technology is to provide solutions to practical 
problems (ST1) 
 
• technological development may involve the creation of 
prototypes, the testing of prototypes and the application 
of knowledge from related scientific and interdisciplinary 
fields (ST2) 
 
• technological problems often require multiple solutions 
that involve different designs, materials and processes 
and that have both intended and unintended 
consequences (ST3) 
 
• scientific knowledge may lead to the development of new 
technologies, and new technologies may lead to or 
facilitate scientific discovery (ST4) 
 
• the process for technological development includes 
(ST5):  
− defining and delimiting, clearly, the problems to be 
solved and establishing criteria to assess the 
technological solution (ST5a) 
− identifying the constraints, the benefits and the 
drawbacks (ST5b) 
− developing designs and prototypes (ST5c) 
− testing and evaluating designs and prototypes on the 
basis of established criteria (ST5d) 
 
• the products of technology are devices, systems and 
processes that meet given needs; however, these products 
cannot solve all problems (ST6) 
 
• the appropriateness, risks and benefits of technologies 
need to be assessed for each potential application from a 
variety of perspectives, including sustainability (ST7) 
 Skills (focus on problem solving) 
Initiating and Planning (IP–ST) 
Students will: 
• identify questions to investigate arising from practical 
problems (IP–ST1) 
• propose and assess alternative solutions to a given 
practical problem, select one and develop a plan  
(IP–ST2) 
• evaluate and select appropriate procedures and 
instruments for collecting data and information and for 
solving problems (IP–ST3) 
 
Performing and Recording (PR–ST) 
Students will: 
• research, integrate and synthesize information from 
various print and electronic sources relevant to a 
practical problem (PR–ST1) 
• construct and test a prototype device or system and 
troubleshoot problems as they arise (PR–ST2) 
• select and use tools, apparatus and materials safely  
(PR–ST3) 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting (AI–ST) 
Students will: 
• evaluate designs and prototypes on the basis of 
self-developed criteria; e.g., function, reliability, cost, 
safety, efficient use of materials, impact on the 
environment (AI–ST1) 
• analyze alternative solutions to a given problem, identify 
potential strengths and weaknesses of each and 
recommend an approach to solving the problem, based 
on findings (AI–ST2) 
• solve problems by selecting appropriate technology to 
perform manipulations and calculations (AI–ST3) 
• identify new questions and problems that arise from 
what was learned and evaluate potential applications of 
findings (AI–ST4) 
 
Communication and Teamwork (CT–ST) 
Students will: 
• work collaboratively to test a prototype device or system 
and troubleshoot problems as they arise (CT–ST1) 
• select and use appropriate numeric, symbolic, graphical 
and linguistic modes of representation to communicate 
findings and conclusions (CT–ST2) 
• evaluate individual and group processes used in 
planning and carrying out problem-solving tasks (CT–
ST3) 
 
 

10/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Framework for Developing a Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis (Grades 10–12) 
 
The following concepts and skills are developed through this STS emphasis. 
Concepts (focus on issues related to the 
application of science and technology) 
Students will develop an understanding that: 
• science and technology are developed to meet societal 
needs and expand human capability (SEC1) 
 
• science and technology have influenced, and been 
influenced by, historical development and societal needs 
(SEC2) 
 
• science and technology have both intended and 
unintended consequences for humans and the 
environment (SEC3) 
 
• society provides direction for scientific and technological 
development (SEC4) 
− Canadian society supports scientific research and 
technological development to facilitate a sustainable 
society, economy and environment (SEC4a) 
− Decisions regarding the application of scientific and 
technological development involve a variety of 
perspectives, including social, cultural, 
environmental, ethical and economic considerations 
(SEC4b) 
− Society supports scientific and technological 
development by recognizing accomplishments, 
publishing and disseminating results and providing 
financial support (SEC4c) 
 
• scientific and technological activity may arise from, and 
give rise to, such personal and social values as accuracy, 
honesty, perseverance, tolerance, open-mindedness, 
critical-mindedness, creativity and curiosity (SEC5) 
 
• science and technology provide opportunities for a 
diversity of careers based on post-secondary studies, for 
the pursuit of hobbies and interests, and for lifelong 
learning (SEC6) 
 
 Skills (focus on applying science to inform 
decision-making processes) 
Initiating and Planning (IP–SEC) 
Students will: 
• identify questions to investigate that arise from issues 
related to the application of science and technology  
(IP–SEC1) 
• plan complex searches for information, using a wide 
variety of electronic and print sources (IP–SEC2) 
• assess and develop appropriate processes for collecting 
relevant data and information about science-and-
technology-related issues (IP–SEC3) 
 
Performing and Recording (PR–SEC) 
Students will: 
• research, integrate and synthesize information from 
various print and electronic sources relevant to a given 
question, problem or issue (PR–SEC1) 
• select information and gather evidence from appropriate 
sources and evaluate search strategies (PR–SEC2) 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting (AI–SEC)  
Students will: 
• apply given criteria for evaluating evidence and assess 
the authority, reliability, scientific accuracy and validity 
of sources of information (AI–SEC1) 
• apply a variety of perspectives in assessing the risks and 
benefits of scientific and technological developments 
(AI–SEC2) 
• assess potential decisions and recommend the best one, 
based on findings (AI–SEC3) 
• identify new questions that arise and evaluate, from a 
variety of perspectives, potential implications of findings 
(AI–SEC4) 
 
Communication and Teamwork (CT–SEC) 
Students will: 
• work collaboratively to investigate a science-and-
technology-related issue (CT–SEC1) 
• communicate in a persuasive and an engaging manner, 
using appropriate multimedia forms, to further 
understand a complex science-and-t echnology-related 
issue (CT–SEC2) 
• make clear and logical arguments to defend a given 
decision on an issue, based on findings (CT–SEC3) 
• evaluate individual and group processes used in 
investigating an issue and in evaluating alternative 
decisions (CT–SEC4) 
 
 
 
 

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /11 
Division 4 ICT Outcomes 
 
Category:  Communicating, Inquiring, Decision Making and Problem Solving 
 
General Outcomes Specific Outcomes 
Students will access, use and 
communicate information from a 
variety of technologies.
 
 
4.1 
plan and perform complex searches, using more than one 
electronic source 
 
4.2 
select information from appropriate sources, including primary 
and secondary sources 
 
 
4.3 
evaluate and explain the advantages and disadvantages of various 
search strategies 
 
 
4.4 
communicate in a persuasive and engaging manner, through 
appropriate forms, such as speeches, letters, reports and 
multimedia presentations, applying information technologies for 
context, audience and purpose that extend and communicate 
understanding of complex issues 
 
Students will seek alternative 
viewpoints, using information 
technologies.
 
 
4.1 
consult a wide variety of sources that reflect varied viewpoints 
on particular topics 
 
4.2 
evaluate the validity of gathered viewpoints against other sources 
 
Students will critically assess 
information accessed through the use 
of a variety of technologies.
 
 
4.1 
assess the authority, reliability and validity of electronically 
accessed information 
 
4.2 
demonstrate discriminatory selection of electronically accessed 
information that is relevant to a particular topic 
 
Students will use organizational 
processes and tools to manage 
inquiry.  
 
 
4.1 
use calendars, time management or project management software 
to assist in conducting an inquiry 
Students will use technology to aid 
collaboration during inquiry.  
 
 
4.1 
4.2 
use telecommunications to pose critical questions to experts 
participate in a variety of electronic group formats 
 
Students will use technology to 
investigate and/or solve problems. 
 
4.1 
investigate and solve problems of prediction, calculation and 
inference 
 4.2 
investigate and solve problems of organization and manipulation 
of information 
  4.3 
manipulate data by using charting and graphing technologies in 
order to test inferences and probabilities 
  4.4 
generate new understandings of problematic situations by using 
some form of technology to facilitate the process 
  4.5 
evaluate the appropriateness of the technology used to 
investigate or solve a problem 
 
Students will use electronic research 
techniques to construct personal 
knowledge and meaning.
 
 
4.1 use appropriate strategies to locate information to meet personal 
needs 
 
4.2 
analyze and synthesize information to determine patterns and 
links among ideas 
 
4.3 
use appropriate presentation software to demonstrate personal 
understandings 
C4 C4 
C1 
C1 
C2 
C2 
C3 C3 
C6 C6 
C7 C7 
C5 
C5 

12/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Division 4 ICT Outcomes (continued) 
 
Category:  Foundational Operations, Knowledge and Concepts 
 
General Outcomes Specific Outcomes 
Students will demonstrate an 
understanding of the nature of 
technology.
 
 
4.1 assess the strengths and weaknesses of computer simulations in 
relation to real-world problems 
 
4.2 solve mathematical and scientific problems by selecting 
appropriate technology to perform calculations and experiments 
 
 
4.3 apply terminology appropriate to technology in all forms of 
communication 
 
 
4.4 demonstrate an understanding of the general concepts of 
computer programming and the algorithms that enable 
technological devices to perform operations and solve problems 
 
Students will understand the role of 
technology as it applies to self, work 
and society.
 
 
4.1 use technology outside formal classroom settings 
 
4.2 analyze how technological innovations and creativity affect the 
economy 
 
4.3 demonstrate an understanding of new and emerging 
communication systems 
 
 
4.4 evaluate possible potential for emerging technologies 
 
 
4.5 demonstrate conservation measures when using technology 
 
 
4.6 demonstrate an understanding of the basic principles and issues 
of e-commerce, including such topics as security and privacy, 
marketing, and implications for governments, businesses and 
consumers alike 
 
 
4.7 use current, reliable information sources from around the world 
 
 
4.8 analyze and assess the impact of technology on the global 
community 
 
Students will demonstrate a moral 
and ethical approach to the use of 
technology. 
 
 
4.1 demonstrate an understanding of how changes in technology can 
benefit or harm society 
 
4.2 record relevant data for acknowledging sources of information, 
and cite sources correctly 
  
4.3 respect ownership and integrity of information 
 
Students will become discerning 
consumers of mass media and 
electronic information. 
 
4.1 discriminate between style and content in a presentation 
 
4.2 evaluate the influence and results of digital manipulation on our 
perceptions 
 
 
4.3 identify and analyze a variety of factors that affect the 
authenticity of information derived from mass media and 
electronic communication 
 
Students will practise the concepts of 
ergonomics and safety when using 
technology. 
 
 
4.1 
4.2 
assess new physical environments with respect to ergonomics  
identify safety regulations specific to the technology being used 
 
Students will demonstrate a basic 
understanding of the operating skills 
required in a variety of technologies.
 
 
4.1 continue to demonstrate the outcomes addressed within the 
previous divisions.  Students interested in pursuing advanced 
study in such areas as electronics, programming, computer-aided 
design and drafting (CADD), robotics and other industrial 
applications of technology will find opportunities in Career and 
Technology Studies (CTS) courses 
F1 
F1 
F2 
F2 
F3 
F3 
F4 F4 
F5 
F5 
F6 
F6 

©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /13 
Division 4 ICT Outcomes (continued) 
 
Category:  Processes for Productivity   
 
General Outcomes Specific Outcomes 
Students will compose, revise and 
edit text.
 
 
4.1 continue to demonstrate the outcomes achieved in prior grades 
and course subjects 
 
Students will organize and 
manipulate data.  
 
4.1 manipulate and present data through the selection of appropriate 
tools, such as scientific instrumentation, calculators, databases 
and/or spreadsheets 
 
Students will communicate through 
multimedia. 
 
4.1 select and use, independently, multimedia capabilities for 
presentations in various subject areas 
 
 
4.2 support communication with appropriate images, sounds and 
music 
 
 
4.3 apply general principles of graphic layout and design to a 
document in process 
 
Students will integrate various 
applications. 
 
4.1 integrate a variety of visual and audio information into a 
document to create a message targeted for a specific audience 
 
 
4.2 apply principles of graphic design to enhance meaning and 
audience appeal 
 
 
4.3 use integrated software effectively and efficiently to reproduce 
work that incorporates data, graphics and text 
 
Students will navigate and create 
hyperlinked resources. 
 
4.1 create multiple-link documents appropriate to the content of a 
particular topic 
 
4.2 post multiple-link pages on the World Wide Web or on a local or 
wide area network 
 
Students will use communication 
technology to interact with others. 
 
4.1 select and use the appropriate technologies to communicate 
effectively with a targeted audience 
 
 
 
P3 
P3 
P4 P4 
P6 
P6 
P1 P1 
P2 
P2 
P5 
P5 

14/  Biology 20 Attitude Outcomes 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
BIOLOGY 20 
 
Biology 20 consists of four units of study: 
 
A. Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere 
B. Ecosystems and Population Change 
C. Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
D. Human Systems 
 
Attitude Outcomes  
 
Students will be encouraged to develop positive attitudes that support the responsible acquisition and 
application of knowledge related to science and technology.  The following attitude outcomes are to be 
developed throughout Biology 20, in conjunction with the specific outcomes for Knowledge; Science, 
Technology and Society (STS); and Skills in each unit. 
 
Interest in Science 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
show interest in science-related questions and issues and confidently pursue personal interests and career 
possibilities within science-related fields; e.g., 
• research the answers to questions they generate 
• explore and use a variety of methods and resources to increase their knowledge and skills 
• be critical and constructive when considering new theories and techniques 
• use scientific vocabulary and principles in everyday discussions 
• recognize the usefulness of being skilled in mathematics and problem solving 
• be interested in science and technology topics not directly related to their formal studies  
• recognize the importance of making connections among various science disciplines 
• maintain interest in pursuing further studies in science  
• explore where further science- and technology-related studies and careers can be pursued 
• recognize that many careers require science- and technology-related knowledge and skills.  
 
Mutual Respect 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
appreciate that scientific understanding evolves from the interaction of ideas involving people with 
different views and backgrounds; e.g., 
• use a multiperspective approach, considering scientific, technological, economic, cultural, political 
and environmental factors when formulating conclusions, solving problems or making decisions on 
an STS issue 
• research carefully and discuss openly ethical dilemmas associated with the applications of science 
and technology 
• explore personal perspectives, attitudes and beliefs toward scientific and technological 
advancements 
• recognize the contribution of science and technology to the progress of civilizations 
• show support for the development of technologies and science as they relate to human needs 
• recognize that the scientific approach is one of many ways of viewing the universe 
• recognize the research contributions of both men and women 
• recognize the research contributions of Canadians. 

Attitude Outcomes Biology 20  /15 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Scientific Inquiry 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
seek and apply evidence when evaluating alternative approaches to investigations, problems and issues; 
e.g., 
• consider the social and cultural contexts in which a theory developed 
• appreciate how scientific problem solving and the development of new technologies are related 
• insist on evidence before accepting a new idea or a new explanation  
• assess, critically, their opinion of the value of science and its applications 
• question arguments in which evidence, explanations or positions do not reflect the diversity of 
perspectives that exist 
• criticize arguments that are based on faulty, incomplete or misleading use of numbers 
• recognize the importance of reviewing the basic assumptions from which a line of inquiry has arisen  
• insist that the critical assumptions behind any line of reasoning be made explicit so that the validity 
of the position taken can be judged 
• evaluate inferences and conclusions, being cognizant of the many variables involved in 
experimentation 
• ask questions and conduct research to ensure understanding 
• expend the effort and time needed to make valid inferences 
• seek new models, explanations and theories when confronted with discrepant events. 
 
Collaboration 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
work collaboratively in planning and carrying out investigations and in generating and evaluating ideas; 
e.g., 
• provide the same attention and energy to the group’s product as they would to a personal assignment 
• be attentive when others speak, seek the point of view of others, and consider a multitude of 
perspectives 
• use appropriate communication technology to elicit feedback from others 
• participate in a variety of electronic group formats. 
 
Stewardship 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
demonstrate sensitivity and responsibility in pursuing a balance between the needs of humans and a 
sustainable environment; e.g., 
• assume part of the collective responsibility for the impact of humans on the environment 
• participate in civic activities related to the preservation and judicious use of the environment and its 
resources 
• encourage their peers or members of their community to participate in a project related to 
sustainability 
• consider all perspectives when addressing issues, weighing scientific, technological and ecological 
factors 
• discuss both the positive and negative effects on human beings and society of environmental changes 
caused by nature and by humans  
• participate in the social and political systems that influence environmental policy in their community  
• promote actions that are not injurious to the environment  

16/  Biology 20 Attitude Outcomes 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
• make personal decisions based on a feeling of responsibility toward less privileged parts of the 
global community and toward future generations 
• be critical-minded regarding the short- and long-term consequences of sustainability. 
 
Safety 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
show concern for safety in planning, carrying out and reviewing activities, referring to the Workplace 
Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS) and consumer product labelling information; e.g., 
• consider safety a positive limiting factor in scientific and technological endeavours 
• read the labels on materials before using them, interpret the WHMIS symbols and consult a 
reference document if safety symbols are not understood 
• manipulate materials carefully, being cognizant of the risks and consequences of their actions 
• assume responsibility for the safety of all those who share a common working environment by 
cleaning up after an activity and disposing of materials according to safety guidelines 
• seek assistance immediately for any first-aid concerns, such as cuts, burns or unusual reactions 
• keep the work station uncluttered, ensuring that only appropriate laboratory materials are present 
• criticize a procedure, a design or a particular use of materials that is not safe or that could have a 
negative impact on the environment 
• use safety and waste disposal as criteria for evaluating an experiment 
• write safety and waste-disposal precautions into a laboratory procedure. 

Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere Biology 20  /17 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere 
 
Themes:  Energy, Equilibrium, Matter and Systems 
 
Overview:  The constant flow of energy and cycling of matter in the biosphere leads to a balanced or 
steady state.  This balance is achieved through various biogeochemical cycles and the processes of 
photosynthesis and cellular respiration. 
 
In this unit, students become familiar with the maintenance of this balance and explore how various 
human activities have affected the balance. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 7 Science, Unit A:  Interactions and Ecosystems 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity 
• Science 10, Unit D:  Energy Flow in Global Systems 
 
Unit A will require approximately 20% of the time allotted for Biology 20. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 24. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How are carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and phosphorus cycled in the biosphere?  How 
is the flow of energy balanced in the biosphere?  How have human activities and technological advances 
affected the balance of energy and matter in the biosphere? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are three major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• biosphere 
• equilibrium  
• trophic levels 
 
• food chains, food webs and ecological pyramids 
(energy, biomass and numbers) 
• carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and phosphorus cycles  
• water properties 
 
1. explain the constant flow of energy through the biosphere and ecosystems 
2. explain the cycling of matter through the biosphere 
3. explain the balance of energy a nd matter exchange in the biosphere, as an open system, and 
explain how this maintains equilibrium. 
 
 

18/  Biology 20 Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–A1.1k explain, in general terms, the one-way flow of energy through the biosphere and how stored 
energy in the biosphere, as a system, is eventually “lost” as heat; e.g., 
• photosynthesis/chemosynthesis 
• cellular respiration (muscle-heat generation, decomposition) 
• energy transfer by conduction, radiation and convection  
20–A1.2k explain how energy in the biosphere can be perceived as a balance between both 
photosynthetic and chemosynthetic activities and cellular respiratory activities; i.e., 
• energy flow in photosynthetic environments 
• energy flow in deep sea vent (chemosynthetic) ecosystems and other extreme 
environments 
20–A1.3k explain the structure of ecosystem trophic levels, using models such as food chains and 
food webs  
20–A1.4k explain, quantitatively, the flow of energy and the exchange of matter in aquatic and 
terrestrial ecosystems, using models such as pyramids of numbers, biomass and energy. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–A1.1sts explain that the process of scientific investigation includes analyzing evidence and 
providing explanations based upon scientific theories and concepts (NS5f) [ICT C6–4.2] 
• evaluate the evidence for the influence of ice and snow on the trapping of solar energy 
(albedo effect) and hypothesize on the consequences of fluctuations for biological 
systems 
• explain how metabolic heat release from harvested grain can be reduced by drying 
processes prior to grain storage and explain the scientific principles involved in this 
technology  
• explain, in terms of energy flow, the advantage of vegetarianism in densely populated 
countries. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain the constant flow of energy through the biosphere and ecosystems. 
 

Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere Biology 20  /19 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–A1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• propose a relationship between producers and available energy of a system  
(IP–SEC1) 
• predict a relationship between solar energy storage by plants and varying light 
conditions (IP–NS3) [ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–A1.2s conduct investigations into relationships among observable variables and use a broad range 
of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• perform an experiment to demonstrate solar energy storage by plants (PR–NS3, PR–NS4, 
PR–NS5) 
• draw, by hand or using technology, annotated diagrams of food chains, food webs and 
ecological pyramids (PR–NS4). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–A1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• analyze data on the diversity of plants, animals and decomposers of an endangered 
ecosystem, e.g., wetlands, short grass prairie, and predict long-term outcomes  
(AI–SEC1)   [ICT C6–4.1] 
• compare alternative ways of presenting energy flow data for ecosystems; i.e., pyramids 
of energy, biomass and numbers (AI–SEC1, AI–NS4, AI–NS6) [ICT C6–4.2] 
• analyze data on the storage of solar energy by plants (AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS4, 
AI–NS6). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–A1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results 
• use appropriate Système international (SI) units, fundamental and derived units and 
significant digits (CT–NS2)

 
• use appropriate numeric, symbolic, graphical and linguistic modes of representation to 
communicate ideas, plans and results (CT–NS2)

 
• use appropriate notation units in the data presented in an energy pyramid (CT–NS2)  
• work cooperatively as a team to investigate, synthesize and present information on the 
effect of organism diversity on an ecosystem (CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) 
[ICT C1–4.4, C7–4.2]. 
 

To be developed throughout the course. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain the constant flow of energy through the biosphere and ecosystems. 
 

20/  Biology 20 Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–A2.1k explain and summarize the biogeochemical cycling of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and 
phosphorus and relate this to general reuse of all matter in the biosphere 
20–A2.2k explain water’s primary role in the biogeochemical cycles, considering its chemical and 
physical properties; i.e., universal solvent, hydrogen bonding. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–A2.1sts explain that science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F3–4.1] 
• discuss the influence of human activities on the biogeochemical cycling of phosphorus, 
sulfur, iron and nitrogen: 
− feedlot operations 
− composting 
− fertilizer applications 
− waste and sewage disposal 
− vehicle and refinery emissions 
− acid deposition  
− persistent organic pollutants 
• discuss the use of water by society, the impact such use has on water quality and 
quantity in ecosystems, and the need for water purification and conservation:  
− manufacturing and processing  
− petrochemical industry  
− agricultural systems  
− mining industry  
− domestic daily water consumption 
• analyze the relationship between heavy metals released into the environment and 
matter exchange in natural food chains/webs and analyze the impact of this 
relationship on quality of life. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the cycling of matter through the biosphere. 

Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere Biology 20  /21 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–A2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• design an experiment to compare the carbon dioxide production of plants with that of 
animals (IP–NS1, IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4)  
• hypothesize how alterations in the carbon cycle, resulting from the burning of fossil 
fuels, might affect other cycling phenomena; e.g., sulfur, iron, water (IP–NS3)  
[ICT C6–4.1] 
• predict disruptions in the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles that are caused by human 
activities (IP–NS3) [ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–A2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• measure and record the pH and the amount of nitrates, phosphates, iron or sulfites in 
water samples (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4) [ICT P2–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–A2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• analyze data collected on water consumption and loss in plants and animals (AI–NS2, 
AI–NS3, AI–NS4) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–A2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results 
• work cooperatively in a group to investigate the influence of human activities on the 
biogeochemical cycles and use appropriate multimedia to present the information to a 
group (CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.2, F2–4.7, P3–4.1]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the cycling of matter through the biosphere. 
 

22/  Biology 20 Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–A3.1k explain the interrelationship of energy, matter and ecosystem productivity (biomass 
production); e.g., 
• Antarctic Ocean versus tropical seas  
• tropical rain forest versus desert 
• taiga versus tundra 
• intertidal zone versus deep-sea benthos  
• Arctic versus Antarctic 
20–A3.2k explain how the equilibrium between gas exchanges in photosynthesis and cellular 
respiration influences atmospheric composition 
20–A3.3k describe the geologic evidence (stromatolites) and scientific explanations for change in 
atmospheric composition, with respect to oxygen and carbon dioxide, from anoxic 
conditions to the present, and describe the significance to current biosphere equilibrium. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–A3.1sts explain that science and technology are developed to meet societal needs and expand 
human capability (SEC1) [ICT F2–4.4, F2–4.8] 
• evaluate the technology of a closed system in terms of energy and matter:  
− space stations and spaceships 
− Biosphere experiments 
− manned exploration of Mars’ surface 
 
20–A3.2sts explain that science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F3–4.1] 
• describe how human activities can have a disrupting influence on the balance in the 
biosphere of photosynthetic and cellular respiratory activities:  
− fossil fuel combustion 
− depletion of stratospheric ozone 
− forest destruction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain the balance of energy and matter exchange in the biosphere, as an open system, 
and explain how this maintains equilibrium. 
 

Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere Biology 20  /23 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–A3.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• predict the effects of changes in carbon dioxide and oxygen concentration on the 
atmospheric equilibrium due to a significant reduction of photosynthetic organisms 
through human activity (IP–NS3) [ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–A3.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• collect evidence from various print and electronic sources on how human activities 
can have a disrupting influence on photosynthetic and cellular respiratory activities 
(PR–SEC1, PR–SEC2) [ICT C1–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–A3.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• design and evaluate a model of a closed biological system in equilibrium with respect 
to carbon dioxide, water and oxygen exchange (PR–ST2, AI–ST1)  
• compare and contrast the flow of energy and the cycling of matter in Biosphere 2 with 
that in Earth’s biosphere (AI–SEC2). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–A3.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• work cooperatively as a group to investigate, synthesize and present information on 
the effects of changes to stratospheric ozone levels on society, agriculture, plants and 
animals ( CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4, C7–4.2, F2–4.7]. 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain the balance of energy and matter exchange in the biosphere, as an open system, 
and explain how this maintains equilibrium. 
 

24/  Biology 20 Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10C, Measurement, Specific Outcome  2; 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Algebra, Specific Outcome 3 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions,  
 Specific Outcomes 1 and 4; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Powers Mathematics10C, Algebra and Number, Specific Outcome 3 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit A but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change Biology 20  /25 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change 
 
Themes:  Energy, Matter and Systems 
 
Overview:  In this unit, students become familiar with a range of ecosystems by studying their 
distinctive biotic and abiotic characteristics.  Students are introduced to the concept of populations as a 
basic component of ecosystem structure and complete the unit by examining population change through 
the process of natural selection. 
 
The content in Unit B prepares students for the study of populations and community dynamics in 
Biology 30. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 7 Science, Unit A:  Interactions and Ecosystems 
• Grade 8 Science, Unit E:  Freshwater and Saltwater Systems 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity 
 
Unit B will require approximately 25% of the time allotted for Biology 20. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 30. 
 
Focusing Questions:  What are the major biotic and abiotic characteristics that distinguish aquatic and 
terrestrial ecosystems?  What data would one need to collect in a field study to illustrate the major abiotic 
characteristics and diversity of organisms?  What mechanisms are involved in the change of populations 
over time?  In what ways do humans apply their knowledge of ecosystems to assess and limit the impact 
of human activities? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are two major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• ecosystem • adaptation and variation 
• population 
• natural selection 
• species 
• evidence for evolution 
• niche 
• biotic/abiotic characteristics 
• limiting factors 
• binomial nomenclature 
1. explain that the biosphere is composed of ecosystems, each with distinctive biotic and abiotic 
characteristics 
2. explain the mechanisms involved in the change of populations over time. 
 
 

26/  Biology 20 Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–B1.1k define species, population, community and ecosystem and explain the interrelationships 
among them 
20–B1.2k explain how terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems support a diversity of organisms through a 
variety of habitats and niches; e.g.,  
• terrestrial:  canopy, sub-canopy, forest floor, soil  
• aquatic:  littoral, limnetic, profundal and benthic zones  
20–B1.3k identify biotic and abiotic characteristics and explain their influence in an aquatic and a 
terrestrial ecosystem in the local region; e.g., stream, lake, prairie, boreal forest, vacant 
lot, sports field 
20–B1.4k explain how limiting factors influence organism distribution and range; e.g.,  
• abiotic factors:  soil, relative humidity, moisture, ambient temperature, sunlight, 
nutrients, oxygen 
• biotic factors:  competitors, predators and parasites 
20–B1.5k explain the fundamental principles of taxonomy and binomial nomenclature, using modes 
of nutrition at the kingdom level and morphological characteristics at the genus species 
level. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–B1.1sts explain how science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F3–4.1] 
• evaluate the impact that human activity has had, or could have, on the biodiversity in 
an ecosystem: 
− wetlands management 
− land use 
− interbasin water transfer 
− habitat fragmentation 
− urbanization 
− slash-and-burn and clearcutting practices  
− monoculturing of forests, lawns, field crops 
• assess the environmental consequences of the introduction of new species into 
established ecosystems (such as tropical fish in Banff Hot Springs, starlings, quack 
grass, scented chamomile, purple loosestrife) and discuss the responsibility of society 
to protect the environment through science and technology  
20–B1.2sts explain how conventions of mathematics, nomenclature and notation provide a basis for 
organizing and communicating scientific theory, relationships and concepts (NS6b) 
• research the historical development of the modern classification system 
• research plant and animal systems of classification developed by Aboriginal peoples 
in their cultural practices. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain that the biosphere is composed of ecosystems, each with distinctive biotic and 
abiotic characteristics. 
 

Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change Biology 20  /27 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–B1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships; plan investigations of questions, ideas, 
problems and issues; and define and delimit problems to facilitate investigation  
• hypothesize the role of biotic and abiotic factors in ecosystems; e.g., competition and 
chinooks (IP–NS3) [ICT C6–4.1]  
• plan a field study to gather and evaluate biotic and abiotic characteristics associated 
with an ecosystem, such as the effects that dominant plants have on abiotic conditions 
such as soil and microclimate (IP–NS1, IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–B1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information 
• perform a field study to measure, quantitatively, appropriate abiotic characteristics of 
an ecosystem and to gather, both quantitatively and qualitatively, evidence for analysis 
of the diversity of life in the ecosystem studied ( PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5)  
[ICT F2–4.1] 
• research and develop a land reclamation strategy for a disturbed area, as a solution to 
environmental damage; e.g., open-pit mine, garbage dump, school yard reclamation 
(PR–SEC1, PR–NS1, PR–NS4) [ICT C1–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–B1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• apply classification and binomial nomenclature systems in a field study (AI–NS1) 
• analyze the interrelationship of biotic and abiotic characteristics that make up the 
ecosystem studied (AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS6)  
• evaluate the accuracy and reliability of instruments used for measurement and identify 
the degree of error in the field-study data (AI–NS4) 
• compile and organize evidence from a variety of sources, for or against human activity 
being responsible for ecosystem change, and analyze the relationship between human 
activity and changing ecosystems (AI–NS2, AI–NS6, AI–SEC2) [ICT C2–4.1,  
C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–B1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results 
• work cooperatively to gather and share data on a field trip (CT–NS1, CT–NS2)  
• work cooperatively to make clear and logical arguments to defend a decision on a 
given issue, such as human impact on ecosystems, land reclamation or wildlife habitat 
preservation ( CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4] 
• develop, present and defend a strategy to improve wildlife habitats ( CT–SEC3)  
[ICT C1–4.4]. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain that the biosphere is composed of ecosystems, each with distinctive biotic and 
abiotic characteristics. 
 

28/  Biology 20 Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–B2.1k explain that variability in a species results from heritable mutations and that some 
mutations may have a selective advantage 
20–B2.2k discuss the significance of sexual reproduction to individual variation in populations and to 
the process of evolution 
20–B2.3k compare Lamarckian and Darwinian explanations of evolutionary change 
20–B2.4k summarize and describe lines of evidence to support the evolution of modern species from 
ancestral forms; i.e., the fossil record, Earth’s history, biogeography, homologous and 
analogous structures, embryology, biochemistry 
20–B2.5k explain speciation and the conditions required for this process   
20–B2.6k describe modern evolutionary theories; i.e., punctuated equilibrium, gradualism. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–B2.1sts explain that scientific knowledge and theories develop through hypotheses, the collection 
of evidence, investigation and the ability to provide explanations (NS2) 
• discuss the nature of science as a way of knowing (contributions of Buffon, Lyell, 
Malthus and Wallace to evolution and contributions of Aristotle, Galileo and Popper 
to the philosophy of science) 
• describe how paleontology and the role of evidence in the accumulation of knowledge 
have provided invaluable data for theories explaining observable variations in 
organisms over time (Burgess Shale) 
• discuss geologic evidence and probable causes for past mass extinctions and contrast 
these to the forces driving the current decline in species. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the mechanisms involved in the change of populations over time. 
 
 

Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change Biology 20  /29 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–B2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• design an investigation to measure or describe an inherited variation in a plant or an 
animal population (IP–NS1, IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4)  
• hypothesize the adaptive significance of the variations in a range of homologous 
structures in extant and extinct organisms (IP–NS3). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–B2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information 
• gather data, actual or simulated, on organisms to demonstrate how inherited 
characteristics change over time, as illustrated by Darwin’s finches, peppered moths, 
bacteria and domesticated plants and animals (PR–NS1, PR–NS4). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–B2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• analyze data, actual or simulated, on plants and animals to demonstrate how 
morphology changes over time; e.g., Darwin’s finches, peppered moths, bacteria, 
domesticated plants or animals (AI–NS2) [ICT C6–4.2, C7–4.2] 
• analyze DNA sequences from online or other sources to infer the relationship between 
different organisms at various classification levels (AI–NS2) [ICT C1–4.1] 
• state a conclusion or generalization based on research data, suggesting how it 
supports or refutes an explanation for biological change, and identify new questions 
or problems that arise from what was learned (AI–NS5, AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–B2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• use appropriate numeric, symbolic, graphical and linguistic modes of representation to 
communicate ideas, plans and results (CT–NS2). 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the mechanisms involved in the change of populations over time. 
 
 

30/  Biology 20 Unit B:  Ecosystems and Population Change 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions,  
 Specific Outcomes 1 and 4; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics,  Specific Outcome 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit B but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration Biology 20  /31 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
 
Themes:  Energy, Matter and Systems 
 
Overview:  The life processes of photosynthesis and cellular respiration allow for the transfer of energy 
and matter.  Students learn, in general terms, how energy from sunlight is transferred into adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and eventually 
into glucose, and how carbohydrates are oxidized to produce reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH), reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH) and eventually ATP.  A detailed knowledge of 
metabolic intermediates is not required. 
 
Students extend their understanding by examining how these cellular processes impact and are impacted 
by global systems. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 7 Science, Unit B:  Plants for Food and Fibre 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
 
Unit C will require approximately 15% of the time allotted for Biology 20. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 36. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How does light energy from the environment enter living systems?  How is the 
energy from light converted to chemical potential in organic matter?  How is the energy in organic matter 
released for use by living systems?  How do humans in their application of technologies impact 
photosynthesis and cellular respiration? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are two major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• absorption of light by pigments • Krebs cycle 
• light-dependent and independent reactions • electron transport systems 
• aerobic and anaerobic respiration • glycolysis 
1. relate photosynthesis to storage of energy in organic compounds 
2. explain the role of cellular respiration in releasing potential energy from organic compounds. 
 

32/  Biology 20 Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–C1.1k explain, in general terms, how energy is absorbed by pigments, transferred through the 
reduction of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) to NADPH, and then 
transferred as chemical potential energy to ATP by chemiosmosis; and describe where in 
the chloroplast these processes occur  
20–C1.2k explain, in general terms, how the products of the light-dependent reactions, NADPH and 
ATP, are used to reduce carbon in the light-independent reactions for the production of 
glucose; and describe where in the chloroplast these processes occur. 
 
Note:  Detailed knowledge of metabolic intermediates is not required. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Science and Technology Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–C1.1sts explain how scientific knowledge may lead to the development of new technologies, and 
new technologies may lead to or facilitate scientific discovery (ST4) [ICT F2–4.4, F2–4.8] 
• analyze the role of photosynthesis as the biological basis of agriculture and forestry 
 
20–C1.2sts explain that the appropriateness, risks and benefits of technologies need to be assessed for 
each potential application from a variety of perspectives, including sustainability (ST7) 
[ICT F3–4.1] 
• research and analyze the effects of herbicides on the biochemistry of photosynthesis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will relate photosynthesis to storage of energy in organic compounds. 
 

Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration Biology 20  /33 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–C1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• identify a testable factor that would affect the rate of photosynthesis (IP–NS1)  
• predict and hypothesize the effect of changes in carbon dioxide and oxygen 
concentration on photosynthesis (IP–NS3) [ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–C1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information 
• use local histories obtained from Aboriginal Elders to describe the importance of plant 
productivity to human sustainability (PR–SEC2) 
• measure rates of evapotranspiration under various environmental conditions and 
relate these rates to photosynthetic activity ( PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4) 
• investigate and integrate, from print and electronic sources, information on the C
3
 and 
C
4
 photosynthetic mechanisms or on the applications of cellular biochemistry in 
medicine or industry (PR–NS1, PR–NS4) [ICT C1–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–C1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• collect and interpret data from chromatography experiments and calculate reference 
flow (R
f
) values (PR–NS3, AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS4) [ICT F1–4.2] 
• draw an analogy between the storage of energy by photosynthesis and the storage of 
energy by solar generating systems (AI–NS6) 
• explain how data supports or refutes the hypothesis on how changes in carbon dioxide 
and oxygen concentration affect photosynthesis (AI–NS4) 
• collect and interpret experimental data that demonstrates that plant leaves produce 
starch in the presence of light (PR–NS3, AI–NS2). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–C1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• work cooperatively as a group to investigate, synthesize and present information on 
the effects of herbicides on the biochemistry of photosynthesis (CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, 
CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4, C7–4.2]. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will relate photosynthesis to storage of energy in organic compounds. 
 

34/  Biology 20 Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–C2.1k explain, in general terms, how glucose is oxidized during glycolysis and the Krebs cycle to 
produce reducing power in NADH and FADH; and describe where in the cell these 
processes occur 
 
Note:  Detailed knowledge of metabolic intermediates is not required. 
 
20–C2.2k explain, in general terms, how chemiosmosis converts the reducing power of NADH and 
FADH to store chemical potential energy as ATP; and describe where in the 
mitochondrion these processes occur 
 
Note:  Detailed knowledge of metabolic intermediates is not required. 
 
20–C2.3k distinguish, in general terms, between aerobic and anaerobic respiration and fermentation 
in plants, animals and yeast 
20–C2.4k summarize and explain the role of ATP in cellular metabolism; e.g.,  
• active transport 
• cytoplasmic streaming 
• phagocytosis 
• biochemical synthesis 
• muscle contraction 
• heat production. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–C2.1sts explain that science and technology are developed to meet societal needs and expand 
human capability (SEC1) [ICT F2–4.4, F2–4.8] 
• research applications of cellular biochemistry in health and industry:  
− aerobic and anaerobic fitness 
− methane gas production from organic waste  
− alcohol production 
− bread making 
− yogurt 
 
20–C2.2sts explain that science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F3–4.1] 
• discuss how pollutants such as hydrogen sulfide and cyanide are by-products of 
industrial processes and explain the specific metabolic effects of these pollutants on 
aerobic organisms. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the role of cellular respiration in releasing potential energy from organic 
compounds. 
 

Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration Biology 20  /35 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–C2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• identify factors affecting the rate of cellular respiration (IP–NS1) 
• design an experiment to demonstrate that heat is a by-product of cellular respiration 
(IP–NS1, IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4)  
• predict and hypothesize the effect of oxic and anoxic conditions on the rate of cellular 
respiration in unicellular organisms such as yeast and bacteria (IP–NS3)  
[ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–C2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• use experimental methods to demonstrate, quantitatively, the oxygen consumption of 
germinating seeds (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• measure temperature change over time of germinating and non-germinating seeds 
(PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• investigate and integrate, from print and electronic sources, information on the action 
of metabolic toxins on cellular respiration (PR–NS1, PR–NS4) [ICT C1–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–C2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• evaluate the reliability, accuracy and validity of sources used to collect information on 
metabolic toxins and cellular respiration (AI–NS4) [ICT C3–4.1] 
• interpret data on the oxygen consumption of an animal and relate this to metabolic 
rate (AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS4, AI–NS6) 
• interpret data that illustrate the effect of oxic and anoxic conditions on cellular 
respiration (AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• relate the Aboriginal metaphor “the trees are the lungs of Mother Earth” to the 
complementary role of the carbon and oxygen cycles (AI–NS6). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–C2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• create a concept map or flow chart to illustrate how the carbon, hydrogen and oxygen 
atoms in glucose are ultimately released as carbon dioxide and water 
• work cooperatively to research and investigate cellular respiration in oxic and anoxic 
conditions and metabolic toxins ( CT–SEC1) [ ICT C1–4.1]. 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the role of cellular respiration in releasing potential energy from organic 
compounds. 
 

36/  Biology 20 Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions,  
 Specific Outcomes 1 and 4; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics,  Specific Outcome 1 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit C but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

Unit D:  Human Systems Biology 20  /37 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit D:  Human Systems 
 
Themes:  Energy, Equilibrium, Matter and Systems 
 
Overview:  Maintenance of metabolic equilibrium in organisms involves a number of physical and 
biochemical processes.  The human organism is used as a model system to examine how energy and 
matter are exchanged with the environment through the processes of gas exchange, digestion, excretion, 
circulation and the function of the motor system.  A defence system contributes to equilibrium by 
eliminating pathogenic organisms.  
 
The content in Unit D prepares students for further studies regarding the functioning of human systems. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 8 Science, Unit B:  Cells and Systems 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
 
Unit D will require approximately 40% of the time allotted for Biology 20. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 47. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How do specialized structures function in the overall biochemical balance of the 
living system?  What conditions result if these structures do not function normally?  How does 
knowledge of living systems and medical technology support the prevention and treatment of disorders? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are four major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• structure and function of major systems:  
respiratory, digestive, excretory, 
circulatory and motor  
• chemical nature of carbohydrates, proteins, 
lipids 
• chemical and physical digestion  
 
• digestive enzymes 
• gas exchange 
• composition of blood 
• immune response 
• renal function 
• muscle contraction 
 
 
 
 
 
1. explain how the human digestive and respiratory systems exchange energy and matter with the 
environment 
2. explain the role of the circulatory and defence systems in maintaining an internal equilibrium 
3. explain the role of the excretory system in maintaining an internal equilibrium in humans through 
the exchange of energy and matter with the environment 
4. explain the role of the motor system in the function of other body systems. 

38/  Biology 20 Unit D:  Human Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–D1.1k identify the principal structures of the digestive and respiratory systems; i.e.,  
• mouth, esophagus, stomach, sphincters, small and large intestines, liver, pancreas, gall 
bladder 
• nasal passages, pharynx, larynx, epiglottis, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, alveoli, 
diaphragm, rib muscles, pleural membranes 
20–D1.2k describe the chemical nature of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins and their enzymes; i.e., 
carbohydrases, lipases and proteases  
20–D1.3k explain enzyme action and factors influencing their action; i.e., temperature, pH, substrate 
concentration, feedback inhibition, competitive inhibition 
20–D1.4k describe the chemical and physical processing of matter through the digestive system into 
the circulatory system  
20–D1.5k explain the exchange of matter and the transfer of thermal energy between the body and 
the environment, using the mechanism of breathing in gas exchange, removal of foreign 
material and heat loss. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Science and Technology Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–D1.1sts explain that the goal of technology is to provide solutions to practical problems (ST1) 
[ICT F2–4.4, F2–4.8] 
• discuss and evaluate the role of food additives and/or food treatment to solve the 
problems of food spoilage ( antioxidants, irradiation technology)  
• explain the biological basis of nutritional deficiencies, including that of anorexia 
nervosa, and the technological means available to restore internal equilibrium  
• identify specific pathologies of the digestive system and technologies used to treat the 
conditions 
• identify specific pathologies of the respiratory system and technologies used to treat 
the conditions 
 
20–D1.2sts explain that the products of technology are devices, systems and processes that meet given 
needs; however, these products cannot solve all problems (ST6) [ICT F2–4.4] 
• assess the physiological effects of smoking and exposure to second-hand smoke and 
the limitations of technologies available to deal with these conditions or diseases 
• assess the short- and long-term impacts of smoking in society, such as the cost of 
health care and insurance. 
 
 
 
Note: Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain how the human digestive and respiratory systems exchange energy and matter 
with the environment. 
 

Unit D:  Human Systems Biology 20  /39 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–D1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• design an investigation to examine food energy through calorimetry, to examine 
enzyme action or to examine the mechanics of breathing (IP–NS1, IP–NS2, IP–NS3, 
IP–NS4). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–D1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• observe, through dissection or computer simulations, the digestive and respiratory 
systems of a representative mammal and identify the major structural components 
(PR–NS2, PR–NS4, PR–NS5)   
• perform experiments, using qualitative tests, to detect the presence of carbohydrates, 
proteins and lipids (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• perform an experiment to investigate the influence of enzyme concentration, 
temperature or pH on the activity of enzymes such as pepsin and pancreatin (PR–NS2,  
PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• perform an experiment to examine the mechanics of breathing, such as lung volume, 
breathing rate (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–D1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• analyze and draw conclusions and assess validity of data from an investigation on 
calorimetry or enzyme action (AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS4, AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze and draw conclusions and assess validity of data from an investigation on the 
mechanics of breathing (AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS4, AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–D1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• use appropriate notation and units to present data from investigations on digestion and 
respiration (CT–NS1, CT–NS2) 
• work cooperatively with team members to investigate how Aboriginal peoples and 
ranchers have used their observations of the excrement of game and farm animals to 
assess the health of these animals (CT–NS1) 
• work cooperatively with team members to research the contributions from various 
cultures to our current understanding of digestion or respiration and healing, such as 
research on the use of traditional remedies to treat respiratory illness (CT–NS1). 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain how the human digestive and respiratory systems exchange energy and matter 
with the environment. 
 

40/  Biology 20 Unit D:  Human Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–D2.1k identify the principal structures of the heart and associated blood vessels; i.e., atria, 
ventricles, septa, valves, aorta, venae cavae, pulmonary arteries and veins, sinoatrial node, 
atrioventricular node, Purkinje fibres 
20–D2.2k describe the action of the heart, blood pressure and the general circulation of blood through 
coronary, pulmonary and systemic pathways 
20–D2.3k describe the structure and function of blood vessels; i.e., arteries, veins and capillaries 
20–D2.4k describe the main components of blood and their role in transport, clotting and resisting the 
influence of pathogens; i.e., plasma, erythrocytes, platelets, leucocytes 
20–D2.5k explain the role of the circulatory system at the capillary level in aiding the digestive, 
excretory, respiratory and motor systems’ exchange of energy and matter with the 
environment 
20–D2.6k explain the role of blood in regulating body temperature 
20–D2.7k describe and explain, in general terms, the function of the lymphatic system 
20–D2.8k list the main cellular and noncellular components of the human defence system and describe 
their role; i.e., skin, macrophage, helper T cell, B cell, killer T cell, suppressor T cell, 
memory T cell 
20–D2.9k describe the ABO and Rh blood groups on the basis of antigens and antibodies. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–D2.1sts explain how Canadian society supports scientific research and technological development to 
facilitate a sustainable society, economy and environment (SEC4a) [ICT F2–4.2, F2–4.8] 
• identify specific pathologies of the circulatory and defence systems, the technologies 
used to treat the conditions and the reasons society supports the development of these 
technologies 
• evaluate the effects that the needs, interests and financial support of society have on 
preventing the spread of pathogens such as staphylococcus, smallpox virus, E. coli and 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)  
• assess the physiological effects of drugs such as caffeine and nicotine on the circulatory 
system and discuss why habitual use of these drugs is a societal concern 
• evaluate the risks and benefits associated with blood transfusion 
 
20–D2.2sts explain that decisions regarding the application of scientific and technological 
developments involve a variety of perspective, including social, cultural, environmental, 
ethical and economic considerations (SEC4b) [ICT F2–4.2, F3–4.1] 
• evaluate the ethical implications of organ and tissue transplants, in terms of the needs, 
interests and financial support of society, on scientific and technological research in 
this field  
• assess the implications of technological advances that assist in maintaining internal 
equilibrium with respect to:  
− pathogens ( vaccinations) 
− defective hearts (artificial valves, artificial hearts, xenotransplantation, stem cell 
culture). 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the role of the circulatory and defence systems in maintaining an internal 
equilibrium. 
 
 

Unit D:  Human Systems Biology 20  /41 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–D2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• design procedures to investigate factors affecting heart rate and blood pressure; e.g., 
physical activity, emotion, gender and chemicals such as caffeine ( IP–NS1, IP–NS2, 
IP–NS3, IP–NS4). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–D2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use a 
broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• measure blood pressure and observe blood flow in capillaries in an organism or through 
demonstration in a virtual laboratory (PR–NS2, PR–NS3) 
• determine the morphology and abundance of cellular components in a prepared human 
blood slide (PR–NS2, PR–NS3) 
• select and integrate information from various sources to observe the principal features 
of a mammalian circulatory system and the direction of blood flow, and identify 
structures from drawings; e.g., valves, chambers (PR–NS1)  
• research and design a simulation or model of the functioning of the main components of 
the human immune system (PR–NS1, PR–ST2) [ICT C6–4.4] 
• compile and display information on blood pressure, heart rate and blood composition 
(PR–NS1, PR–NS4) 
• carry out a heart dissection to identify the major parts and to determine the directional 
flow of blood through the organ (PR–NS3). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–D2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• determine, from available data, the relationship between blood pressure and exercise 
(AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• investigate lifestyle behaviour, physical fitness and heart rate recovery, using available 
data, and account for discrepancies (AI–NS2, AI–NS3) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• identify the limitations and evaluate the dependability of devices used to measure blood 
pressure (AI–NS4) [ICT C6–4.5] 
• explore solutions to practical problems associated with the circulatory system, such as 
organ and tissue transplants and artificial blood (AI–ST2) [ICT C1–4.1] 
• determine blood groups from samples of artificial blood or electronic resources  
(AI–NS6)  
• predict compatibility of ABO and Rh blood types between donor and recipient  
(AI–NS6). 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the role of the circulatory and defence systems in maintaining an internal 
equilibrium. 
 
 

42/  Biology 20 Unit D:  Changes in Living Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–D2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• work cooperatively with team members to measure and record blood pressure, heart 
rate or any other factor relating to the circulatory system (CT–NS1, CT–NS2)  
[ICT C6–4.4]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the role of the circulatory and defence systems in maintaining an internal 
equilibrium. 
 
 

Unit D:  Human Systems Biology 20  /43 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–D3.1k identify the principal structures in the excretory system; i.e., kidneys, ureters, urinary 
bladder, urethra 
20–D3.2k identify the major and associated structures of the nephron, including the glomerulus, 
Bowman’s capsule, tubules, loop of Henle, collecting duct, afferent and efferent arterioles, 
and capillary net, and explain their function in maintaining plasma compositions  
(i.e., water, pH, ions) 
20–D3.3k describe the function of the kidney in excreting metabolic wastes and expelling them into 
the environment 
20–D3.4k identify the role of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and aldosterone in water and sodium ion 
reabsorption, excretion and blood pressure regulation. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–D3.1sts explain that the goal of science is knowledge about the natural world (NS1) 
• examine how lifestyle factors contribute to hypertension and affect kidney function: 
− drugs, such as alcohol and nicotine 
− sedentary lifestyle 
− dietary excesses or deficiencies 
− stress 
• explain how an understanding of nephron function is applied to renal and peritoneal 
dialysis  
• identify specific pathologies of the excretory system and the scientific knowledge 
connected with the treatment 
− identify the physiological complexities and challenges of organ and tissue 
transplants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain the role of the excretory system in maintaining an internal equilibrium in 
humans through the exchange of energy and matter with the environment. 
 
 

 
44/  Biology 20 Unit D:  Human Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–D3.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• predict how blood pressure affects urine composition and volume ( IP–NS3)  
[ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–D3.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• research and create a flowchart to describe how humans maintain homeostasis with 
respect to water and ions; e.g.,  
− when water intake is increased or decreased  
− when diuretic compounds, such as caffeine or alcohol, are ingested 
− when excessive sodium is ingested 
− after periods of intense exercise, fever, hemorrhage (PR–NS1) 
• perform a kidney dissection to identify major structures of the organ (PR–NS3). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–D3.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• observe the principal features of a mammalian excretory system and identify structures 
from drawings obtained from various print and electronic sources (AI–NS1)  
[ICT C1–4.1] 
• collect and interpret data in analysis of simulated urine, identify limitations of the data, 
compare the data to theoretical values and produce a generalization (PR–NS2,  
PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5, AI–NS2, AI–NS4, AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2]  
• assess technological solutions to kidney failure, such as peritoneal dialysis, 
hemodialysis and kidney transplant, and identify the potential strengths and 
weaknesses of each (AI–ST2). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–D3.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• work cooperatively with team members to assess and record simulated urine 
composition (CT–NS1, CT–NS2). 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain the role of the excretory system in maintaining an internal equilibrium in 
humans through the exchange of energy and matter with the environment. 
 
 

Unit D:  Human Systems  Biology 20  /45 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
20–D4.1k explain how the motor system supports body functions ( i.e., digestive, circulatory, 
respiratory, excretory and locomotory), referencing smooth, cardiac and striated muscle 
20–D4.2k describe, in general, the action of actin and myosin in muscle contraction and heat 
production. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
20–D4.1sts explain that concepts, models and theories are often used in interpreting and explaining 
observations and in predicting future observations (NS6a) 
• analyze the effects of exercise on muscle fibre 
• describe the relationship between fitness and efficiency of muscle action  
• assess the physiological effects on the motor system of anabolic steroids and energy-
enhancing drugs such as creatine phosphate 
 
20–D4.2sts explain that the goal of technology is to provide solutions to practical problems (ST1) 
[ICT F2–4.4, F2–4.8] 
• identify specific pathologies of the motor system, such as muscle atrophy, fatigue, 
strain and tendonitis, and identify technologies used to treat the conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 4 
Students will explain the role of the motor system in the function of other body systems. 

 
46/  Biology 20 Unit D:  Human Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
20–D4.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• design an investigation to determine the relationship between muscle activity, energy 
consumption and fatigue (IP–NS1, IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4).  
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
20–D4.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• identify smooth, cardiac and striated muscle tissue under magnification (PR–NS2) 
• design and construct a model of a muscle fibre (PR–ST2). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
20–D4.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• obtain and interpret data to demonstrate a direct correlation between energy use by 
muscle cells and heat production (AI–NS2). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
20–D4.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• use appropriate Système international (SI) units and fundamental and derived units 
(CT–NS2) 
• work cooperatively with team members to measure and record body temperature  
(CT–NS1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 4 
Students will explain the role of the motor system in the function of other body systems. 
 
 

Unit D:  Human Systems  Biology 20  /47 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Algebra, Specific Outcome 3 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics,  Specific Outcome 1 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit D but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

 
48/  Biology 30  Attitude Outcomes 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
BIOLOGY 30 
 
Biology 30 consists of four units of study: 
 
A.   Nervous and Endocrine Systems 
B.   Reproduction and Development 
C.   Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology  
D.   Population and Community Dynamics 
 
Attitude Outcomes 
 
Students will be encouraged to develop positive attitudes that support the responsible acquisition and 
application of knowledge related to science and technology.  The following attitude outcomes are to be 
developed throughout Biology 30, in conjunction with the specific outcomes for Knowledge; Science, 
Technology and Society (STS); and Skills in each unit. 
 
Interest in Science 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
show interest in science-related questions and issues and confidently pursue personal interest and career 
possibilities within science-related fields; e.g., 
• research the answers to questions they generate 
• explore and use a variety of methods and resources to increase their knowledge and skills 
• be critical and constructive when considering new theories and techniques 
• use scientific vocabulary and principles in everyday discussions 
• recognize the usefulness of being skilled in mathematics and problem solving 
• be interested in science and technology topics not directly related to their formal studies  
• recognize the importance of making connections between various science disciplines 
• maintain interest in pursuing further studies in science  
• explore where further science- and technology-related studies and careers can be pursued 
• recognize that part-time jobs require science- and technology-related knowledge and skills.  
 
Mutual Respect 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
appreciate that scientific understanding evolves from the interaction of ideas involving people with 
different views and backgrounds; e.g., 
• use a multiperspective approach, considering scientific, technological, economic, cultural, political 
and environmental factors when formulating conclusions, solving problems or making decisions on 
an STS issue 
• research carefully and discuss openly ethical dilemmas associated with the applications of science 
and technology 
• explore personal perspectives, attitudes and beliefs toward scientific and technological 
advancements 
• recognize the contribution of science and technology to the progress of civilizations 
• show support for the development of technologies and science as they relate to human needs 
• recognize that the scientific approach is one of many ways of viewing the universe 
• recognize the research contributions of both men and women 
• recognize the research contributions of Canadians. 

Attitude Outcomes Biology 30  /49 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
Scientific Inquiry 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
seek and apply evidence when evaluating alternative approaches to investigations, problems and issues; 
e.g., 
• consider the social and cultural contexts in which a theory developed 
• appreciate how scientific problem solving and the development of new technologies are related 
• insist on evidence before accepting a new idea or a new explanation  
• assess, critically, their opinion of the value of science and its applications 
• question arguments in which evidence, explanations or positions do not reflect the diversity of 
perspectives that exist 
• criticize arguments based on faulty, incomplete or misleading use of numbers 
• recognize the importance of reviewing the basic assumptions from which a line of inquiry has arisen  
• insist that the critical assumptions behind any line of reasoning be made explicit, so that the validity 
of the position taken can be judged 
• evaluate inferences and conclusions, being cognizant of the many variables involved in 
experimentation 
• ask questions and conduct research to ensure understanding 
• expend the effort and time needed to make valid inferences 
• seek new models, explanations and theories when confronted with discrepant events. 
 
Collaboration 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
work collaboratively in planning and carrying out investigations and in generating and evaluating ideas; 
e.g., 
• provide the same attention and energy to the group’s product as they would to a personal assignment 
• be attentive when others speak, seek the point of view of others, and consider a multitude of 
perspectives 
• use appropriate communication technology to elicit feedback from others 
• participate in a variety of electronic group formats. 
 
Stewardship 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
demonstrate sensitivity and responsibility in pursuing a balance between the needs of humans and a 
sustainable environment; e.g., 
• assume part of the collective responsibility for the impact of humans on the environment 
• participate in civic activities related to the preservation and judicious use of the environment and its 
resources 
• encourage their peers or members of their community to participate in a project related to 
sustainability 
• consider all perspectives when addressing issues, weighing scientific, technological and ecological 
factors 
• discuss both the positive and negative effects of environmental changes caused by nature and by 
humans on human beings and society  
• participate in the social and political systems that influence environmental policy in their community  
• promote actions that are not injurious to the environment 

 
50/  Biology 30  Attitude Outcomes 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
• make personal decisions based on a feeling of responsibility toward less privileged parts of the 
global community and toward future generations 
• be critical-minded regarding the short- and long-term consequences of sustainability. 
 
Safety 
 
Students will be encouraged to: 
show concern for safety in planning, carrying out and reviewing activities with reference to WHMIS and 
consumer product labelling information; e.g., 
• consider safety a positive limiting factor in scientific and technological endeavours 
• read the labels on materials before using them, interpret the WHMIS symbols, and consult a 
reference document if safety symbols are not understood 
• manipulate materials carefully, being cognizant of the risks and consequences of their actions 
• assume responsibility for the safety of all those who share a common working environment by 
cleaning up after an activity and disposing of materials according to safety guidelines 
• seek assistance immediately for any first aid concerns, such as cuts, burns or unusual reactions 
• keep the work station uncluttered, ensuring that only appropriate laboratory materials are present 
• criticize a procedure, a design or materials that are not safe or that could have a negative impact on 
the environment 
• write safety and waste-disposal precautions into a laboratory procedure 
• use safety and waste disposal as criteria for evaluating an experiment. 
 
 

Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems Biology 30  /51 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems  
 
Themes:  Equilibrium and Systems 
 
Overview:  This unit examines the biological processes that mediate the interactions between humans 
and their environment to maintain equilibrium.  The nervous system contributes to homeostasis through 
its response to internal and external stimuli.  Endocrine glands help to maintain homeostasis through the 
hormones they release into the blood.  A study of the interactions between the nervous and endocrine 
systems leads to an examination of the functioning of the central and peripheral nervous systems and 
their ability to sense the environment and respond to it. 
 
This unit builds on:  
• Grade 8 Science, Unit B:  Cells and Systems 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
• Biology 20, Unit D:  Human Systems 
 
Unit A will require approximately 25% of the time allotted for Biology 30. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 56. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How does the human body maintain equilibrium between its internal and external 
environments?  What physiological processes and control systems are involved in maintaining homeostasis?  
What medical technologies are available to alleviate disorders of the nervous and endocrine systems? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are two major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will:  
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• neuron 
• nerve impulse transmission  
• central and peripheral nervous systems 
• reflex arcs 
• sensory receptors 
• endocrine system and hormones 
• homeostasis and feedback systems 
• endocrine and nervous system interactions 
 
1. explain how the nervous system controls physiological processes 
2. explain how the endocrine system contributes to homeostasis. 

 
52/  Biology 30  Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–A1.1k describe the general structure and function of a neuron and myelin sheath, explaining the 
formation and transmission of an action potential, including all-or-none response and 
intensity of response; the transmission of a signal across a synapse; and the main chemicals 
and transmitters involved, i.e., norepinephrine, acetylcholine and cholinesterase 
30–A1.2k identify the principal structures of the central and peripheral nervous systems and explain 
their functions in regulating the voluntary (somatic) and involuntary (autonomic) systems 
of the human organism; i.e., cerebral hemispheres and lobes, cerebellum, pons, medulla 
oblongata, hypothalamus, spinal cord, sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, 
and the sensory-somatic nervous system 
30–A1.3k describe, using an example, the organization of neurons into nerves and the composition 
and function of reflex arcs; e.g., the patellar reflex, the pupillary reflex 
30–A1.4k describe the structure and function of the parts of the human eye; i.e., the cornea, lens, 
sclera, choroid, retina, rods and cones, fovea centralis, pupil, iris and optic nerve 
30–A1.5k describe the structure and function of the parts of the human ear, including the pinna, 
auditory canal, tympanum, ossicles, cochlea, organ of Corti, auditory nerve, semicircular 
canals and Eustachian tube 
30–A1.6k explain other ways that humans sense their environment and their spatial orientation in it; 
e.g., olfactory receptors, proprioceptors, taste receptors, receptors in the skin. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–A1.1sts explain that scientific knowledge and theories develop through hypotheses, the collection 
of evidence, investigation and the ability to provide explanations (NS2) 
• discuss the biological basis of neurological diseases such as Alzheimer’s or 
Parkinson’s disease and how this relates to treatment  
• evaluate the impact of photoperiod (light wavelength and duration) on humans and 
identify adaptations to light deprivation in northern communities 
 
30–A1.2sts explain that scientific investigation includes the process of analyzing evidence and 
providing explanations based upon scientific theories and concepts (NS5f) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze experimental evidence regarding the influence of anesthetics, drugs and 
chemicals, natural and synthetic, on the functioning of the nervous system and relate 
this to addiction theories  
• analyze the contribution of technological developments and physiological knowledge 
to longevity and quality of life 
 
30–A1.3sts explain that the goal of technology is to provide solutions to practical problems (ST1) 
[ICT F2–4.4]  
• investigate technologies available to correct eye defects such as myopia, hyperopia 
and astigmatism and ear defects such as hearing loss and tinnitus  
• investigate the biological basis of neurotoxin action and their antidotes (snake venom, 
box jellyfish, botulin, reserpine [Rauwolfia serpentina]) 
• investigate the use of neurotoxins by Indigenous peoples 
• discuss how advances in science have contributed to technologies that increase access 
to the world beyond normal sensory limits. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain how the nervous system controls physiological processes. 
 

Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems Biology 30  /53 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–A1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• design an experiment to investigate heat, cold, pressure and touch receptors (IP–NS1, 
IP–NS2, IP–NS3). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–A1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• design and perform an experiment to investigate the physiology of reflex arcs  
(IP–NS2, PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4) [ICT F1–4.2] 
• perform experiments to measure the ability to discriminate objects visually and to hear 
a range of sounds (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4) 
• use a microscope and prepared slides to observe neurons and synapses (PR–NS2,  
PR–NS3, PR–NS4) 
• observe the principal features of a mammalian brain, eye and ear, using models, 
computer simulations or dissections, and identify the major structures of those organs 
(PR–NS3, PR–NS4) [ICT C6–4.4] 
• investigate and integrate, from library and electronic sources, information on the 
impact of photoperiod and wavelength on humans (PR–NS1, PR–NS4) [ICT C1–4.1] 
• compile and display, in appropriate format, data collected from investigations on 
reflex arcs, stimulus strength versus force of muscle contraction, and/or auditory 
range (PR–NS4) [ICT P2–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–A1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• interpret patterns and trends in data on strength of stimuli versus force of muscle 
contraction (AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze and interpret aspects of vision, such as blind spot, acuity, accommodation, 
adaptation, binocular vision and peripheral vision (AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze a hearing aid as a device that simulates a sensory function (AI–ST1) 
• pose new questions, such as:  “Why are some people more tolerant to pain than 
others?” (AI–NS5) 
• collect and analyze class data on colour charts (PR–NS4, AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze data that shows the interrelationship between taste and smell receptors  
(AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–A1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• use appropriate Système international (SI) units, fundamental and derived units and 
significant digits (CT–NS2)

 
• use appropriate numeric, symbolic, graphical and linguistic modes of representation to 
communicate ideas, plans and results (CT–NS2)

 
• work cooperatively with group members to investigate neurological disorders such as 
Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease (CT–NS1). 

To be developed throughout the course. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain how the nervous system controls physiological processes. 
 

 
54/  Biology 30  Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–A2.1k identify the principal endocrine glands of humans; i.e., the hypothalamus/pituitary 
complex, thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal glands and islet cells of the pancreas 
30–A2.2k describe the function of the hormones of the principal endocrine glands, i.e., thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH)/thyroxine, calcitonin/parathyroid hormone (PTH), 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)/cortisol, glucagon/insulin, human growth hormone 
(hGH), antidiuretic hormone (ADH), epinephrine, aldosterone, and describe how they 
maintain homeostasis through feedback  
30–A2.3k explain the metabolic roles hormones may play in homeostasis; i.e., thyroxine in 
metabolism; insulin, glucagon and cortisol in blood sugar regulation; hGH in growth; ADH 
in water regulation; aldosterone in sodium ion regulation 
30–A2.4k explain how the endocrine system allows humans to sense their internal environment and 
respond appropriately; e.g., calcium balance, osmotic pressure of blood 
30–A2.5k compare the endocrine and nervous control systems and explain how they act together; 
e.g., stress and the adrenal gland 
30–A2.6k describe, using an example, the physiological consequences of hormone imbalances; i.e., 
diabetes mellitus (e.g., diabetes insipidus, gigantism, goitre, cretinism, Graves’ disease). 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–A2.1sts explain that science and technology are developed to meet societal needs and expand 
human capability (SEC1) [ICT F2–4.8] 
• compare the function of technological control systems, such as computer control 
systems for car emissions, with electrochemical control systems in organisms 
• assess the impact of research into biochemical control systems on human performance 
• describe the current treatments for type 1 and type 2 diabetes 
 
30–A2.2sts explain that science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F2–4.8, F3–4.1] 
• evaluate the use of biotechnology to solve practical problems (hormone synthesis for 
diabetes mellitus, dwarfism, milk yield in cows) 
• evaluate the use of hormone therapy in the treatment of humans (growth hormone and 
aging, anabolic steroids and human performance) 
• explain the relationship between pigment deposition within skin cells and ultraviolet 
light as influenced by stratospheric ozone. 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain how the endocrine system contributes to homeostasis. 
 

Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems Biology 30  /55 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–A2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, ideas, 
problems and issues  
• formulate a hypothesis, from published data, on an environmental factor that can be 
detected and responded to by humans; e.g., stress and hormonal disruption, ultraviolet 
light and pigment deposition, diet and thyroid function (IP–NS3). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–A2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use a 
broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information 
• research seasonal affective disorder (SAD) or general adaptation syndrome and identify 
the main hormonal and nervous components (PR–NS4). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–A2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• infer the role of ADH and aldosterone in the maintenance of water and ions, using the 
analysis and interpretation of data on blood and urine composition (AI–NS6)  
[ICT C7–4.2] 
• infer the role of insulin in the regulation of blood sugar by performing an experiment to 
investigate the presence of glucose in simulated urine and comparing the results with 
normal urinalysis data, and/or investigate the role of insulin in the regulation of blood 
sugar by using a computer simulation (AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–A2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of science 
in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• evaluate individual and group processes used in planning and carrying out group 
investigations of hormone therapy or the use of biotechnology to solve practical 
problems (CT–SEC1, CT–SEC4). 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain how the endocrine system contributes to homeostasis. 
 

 
56/  Biology 30  Unit A:  Nervous and Endocrine Systems 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1 
 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit A but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

Unit B:  Reproduction and Development   Biology 30  /57 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
Unit B:  Reproduction and Development   
 
Themes:  Change and Systems 
 
Overview:  This unit investigates the human reproductive system as a representative mammalian system 
responsible for propagating the organism and perpetuating the species.  The processes associated with 
human reproduction and development, as well as the regulation of these processes by hormones, are 
reviewed.  The influence of environmental factors on embryonic and fetal development is examined, as 
are various reproductive technologies.   
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 8 Science, Unit B:  Cells and Systems 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
• Biology 20, Unit D:  Human Systems 
 
Unit B will require approximately 20% of the time allotted for Biology 30. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 64. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How do the reproductive systems function to ensure survival of the species?  What 
mechanisms are responsible for regulating the reproductive systems?  What are the major processes and 
events of human embryonic and fetal development?  How do reproductive technologies affect 
functioning of the reproductive systems, and what impact do these technologies have on society? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are three major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• male and female reproductive systems 
• reproductive hormones 
• reproductive technologies 
 
• embryonic and fetal development 
• parturition 
• lactation 
 
 
1. explain how survival of the human species is ensured through reproduction 
2. explain how human reproduction is regulated by chemical control systems 
3. explain how cell differentiation and development in the human organism are regulated by a 
combination of genetic, endocrine and environmental factors. 
 

 
58/  Biology 30  Unit B:  Reproduction and Development   
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge  
 
Students will: 
30–B1.1k identify the structures in the human female reproductive system and describe their 
functions; i.e., ovaries, Fallopian tubes, uterus, endometrium, cervix, vagina 
30–B1.2k identify the structures in the human male reproductive system and describe their functions; 
i.e., testes, seminiferous tubules, interstitial cells, Sertoli cells, epididymides, vasa (ductus) 
deferentia, Cowper’s glands, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, ejaculatory duct, urethra, 
penis 
30–B1.3k distinguish sperm and egg from their supporting structures; i.e., seminiferous tubules, 
interstitial cells, Sertoli cells, follicle, corpus luteum 
30–B1.4k describe the chromosomal factors and hormonal influence on the formation of the gonads 
and reproductive organs in the female and male embryo and fetus; i.e., Y chromosome and 
role of testosterone  
30–B1.5k explain how sexually transmitted infections (STIs) can interfere with fertility and 
reproduction; e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, human papilloma virus. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–B1.1sts explain that decisions regarding the application of scientific and technological 
development involve a variety of perspectives, including social, cultural, environmental, 
ethical and economic considerations (SEC4b) 
• evaluate the implications of a reproductive technology for human biology 
• consider the application of long-term scientific and technological solutions to 
population control, using the Aboriginal concept of seven generations 
• discuss society’s expectations of the scientific community with respect to reproductive 
technologies 
• discuss the impact of STIs on individuals, considering the physiological damage they 
cause. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain how survival of the human species is ensured through reproduction. 
 

Unit B:  Reproduction and Development Biology 30  /59 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–B1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• identify ethical concerns about reproductive technologies, infertility and the 
transmission of STIs (IP–SEC1). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–B1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• observe the principal features of the human reproductive system, using models or 
computer simulations, and identify the major structures from drawings (PR–NS4) 
[ICT C6–4.4] 
• use a microscope to observe prepared slides of ovaries and testes so as to distinguish 
eggs and sperm from their supporting structures; i.e., follicle, corpus luteum, 
interstitial cells, Sertoli cells, seminiferous tubules (PR–NS2, PR–NS4).  
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–B1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• evaluate practical solutions to decreased fertility; i.e., low sperm count, difficulty in 
egg production, hormonal imbalance (AI–ST2, AI–SEC2) 
• evaluate information collected from library and electronic sources on the implications 
of reproductive technologies such as surrogacy, sperm banks and cloning (AI–SEC2,  
AI–SEC4) [ICT C1–4.1, C3–4.1, C3–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–B1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• work cooperatively as a team to research the damage to reproductive organs caused 
by STIs and use appropriate multimedia to present the findings to the class  
(CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2) [ICT C1–4.4, P3–4.1]. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will explain how survival of the human species is ensured through reproduction. 
 

 
60/  Biology 30  Unit B:  Reproduction and Development   
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge  
 
Students will: 
30–B2.1k describe the role of hormones, i.e., gonadotropic-releasing hormone (GnRH), follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estrogen, progesterone, 
testosterone, in the regulation of primary and secondary sex characteristics in females and 
males 
30–B2.2k identify the principal reproductive hormones in the female and explain their interactions in 
the maintenance of the menstrual cycle; i.e., estrogen, progesterone, FSH, LH  
30–B2.3k identify the principal reproductive hormones in the male and explain their interactions in 
the maintenance and functioning of the male reproductive system; i.e., testosterone, FSH, 
LH. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–B2.1sts explain how science and technology have influenced, and been influenced by, historical 
development and societal needs (SEC2) 
• research and assess the effects of the medical use of reproductive hormones on 
humans 
• research and assess the implications for humans of producing and using reproductive 
hormones in domestic animals, such as cattle and horses 
 
30–B2.2sts explain why decisions regarding the application of scientific and technological 
development involve a variety of perspectives, including social, cultural, environmental, 
ethical and economic considerations (SEC4b) [ICT F2–4.2, F3–4.1] 
• explain how reproductive hormone homeostasis is disrupted by the natural aging 
process and discuss whether available technologies, such as hormone treatment for 
menopause and andropause, should be used to restore balance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
  
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain how human reproduction is regulated by chemical control systems. 
 

Unit B:  Reproduction and Development Biology 30  /61 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–B2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• design an investigation to determine at which point during the menstrual cycle a 
female is most fertile (IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–B2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• graph the changes in estrogen, progesterone, FSH and LH levels in the blood of a 
female through a single menstrual cycle (PR–NS4) [ICT C6–4.2] 
• identify the follicle and corpus luteum within the ovary, using models, diagrams or 
computer simulations (PR–NS4) [ICT C6–4.4]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–B2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• analyze blood hormone data and physiological events for a single menstrual cycle, 
inferring the roles of female sex hormones (AI–NS2, AI–NS6) 
• analyze blood hormone data and physiological events, inferring the roles of male sex 
hormones (AI–NS2, AI–NS6) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• research and assess the effects of the medical use of reproductive hormones on 
conditions such as menopause, andropause and infertility (PR–SEC1, AI–SEC2,  
AI–SEC4) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–B2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• select and use appropriate numerical and graphical modes of representation to 
communicate information on changing reproductive hormone levels in the blood  
(CT–ST2) 
• work cooperatively with team members to investigate the impact of the use of 
reproductive hormones in agriculture on the environment (such as the feminization of 
fish) and, using appropriate multimedia, present the information to the class  
(CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4, P3–4.1]. 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
  
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain how human reproduction is regulated by chemical control systems. 
 

 
62/  Biology 30 Unit B:  Reproduction and Development 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge  
 
Students will: 
30–B3.1k trace the processes of fertilization, implantation and extra-embryonic membrane formation, 
i.e., placenta, amnion, chorion, allantois, followed by embryonic and fetal development, 
parturition and lactation, and describe the control mechanisms of these events, i.e., 
progesterone, LH, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), prostaglandins, oxytocin, 
prolactin 
30–B3.2k describe development from fertilization to parturition in the context of the main 
physiological events that occur in the development of organ systems during each major 
stage (trimester); i.e., zygote, blastocyst, gastrulation, general morphogenesis  
30–B3.3k identify major tissues and organs that arise from differentiation and morphological 
development of the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm in the embryo; i.e., 
• ectoderm:  nervous system, epidermis 
• mesoderm:  skeleton, muscles, reproductive structures 
• endoderm:  lining of the digestive and respiratory systems, endocrine glands 
30–B3.4k describe the influence of environmental factors on embryonic and fetal development; e.g., 
maternal lifestyle, teratogens such as alcohol, drugs, viral infections and radiation 
30–B3.5k describe the physiological or mechanical basis of different reproductive technologies; i.e., 
conception control, in vitro fertilization, infertility reversal. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–B3.1sts explain that science and technology are developed to meet societal needs and expand 
human capability (SEC1) 
• analyze the use of technology to solve problems of immunological incompatibility 
between fetus and mother  
 
30–B3.2sts explain why decisions regarding the application of scientific and technological 
development involve a variety of perspectives, including social, cultural, environmental, 
ethical and economic considerations (SEC4b) 
• assess the use of technologies such as ultrasound, chorionic villus sampling (CVS), 
amniocentesis and a fetal heart rate monitor in monitoring fetal development 
• assess the effects of a conception control technology on population demographics in 
developed and developing countries 
• discuss how knowledge of embryonic/fetal development has influenced the value that 
society places on human life 
• discuss the societal impact of environmental contaminants (such as polychlorinated 
biphenyls [PCBs], heavy metals, dioxins and furans) and teratogens. 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
  
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain how cell differentiation and development in the human organism are regulated 
by a combination of genetic, endocrine and environmental factors. 
 

Unit B:  Reproduction and Development Biology 30  /63 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–B3.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• design an experiment to investigate hormonal changes during pregnancy (IP–NS2, 
IP–NS3, IP–NS4). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–B3.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• investigate, using library and electronic sources, the effects of environmental factors 
on human embryonic and fetal development; e.g., alcohol, cocaine, cigarette smoke, 
diet, and prescription and nonprescription drugs (PR–SEC1) [ICT C1–4.1] 
• research the societal impact of technology such as ultrasound, amniocentesis, in vitro 
fertilization and CVS (PR–SEC1) [ICT F3–4.1] 
• investigate, using library and electronic sources, how embryonic cells communicate 
during development (PR–NS1) [ICT C1–4.1]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–B3.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• observe the changes during embryo development, using preserved material such as 
chicken embryos, models or computer simulations, and extrapolate these events to the 
development of a human (PR–NS3, AI–NS2) [ICT C6–4.1, C6–4.4] 
• interpret hormonal data from published investigations; e.g., pregnancy testing  
(AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• evaluate, from published data, the effectiveness and safety of various reproductive 
technologies (AI–SEC1, AI–SEC2) 
• analyze the stages of embryonic and fetal development (AI–NS2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
  
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain how cell differentiation and development in the human organism are regulated 
by a combination of genetic, endocrine and environmental factors. 
 
 

 
64/  Biology 30 Unit B:  Reproduction and Development 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–B3.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• develop clear and logical arguments, based on published data, to defend a given 
decision on the effectiveness and safety of available reproductive technologies  
(CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1 
 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics, Specific Outcome 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
  
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain how cell differentiation and development in the human organism are regulated 
by a combination of genetic, endocrine and environmental factors. 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit B but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology Biology 30  /65 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology 
 
Themes:  Change and Diversity 
 
Overview:  This unit examines the two types of cell division, mitosis and meiosis.  Students learn about 
chromosomal behaviour during cell division and expand their knowledge of chromosomes by studying 
classical genetics.  Classical genetics is further extended to a molecular level by exploring the basic 
structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), its role in protein synthesis and the impact of mutation.  
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity 
 
Unit C will require approximately 40% of the time allotted for Biology 30. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 73. 
 
Focusing Questions:  What cellular processes allow for growth and reproduction of an organism?  What 
regulates the transmission of genetic information from one generation to the next?  How is DNA 
responsible for the production of proteins?  How has knowledge of the molecular nature of genes and 
DNA led to new biotechnologies and the treatment of genetic disorders? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are three major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• cell cycle 
• mitosis and meiosis 
• chromosome number 
• karyotype 
• alternation of generations 
• Mendel’s laws of heredity 
• probability 
• monohybrid, dihybrid and sex-linked 
inheritance 
• incomplete dominance and codominance 
• polygenic and multiple allelic traits 
• gene linkage  
• model of DNA 
• replication 
• transcription  
• translation 
• mutation 
• genetic engineering 
1. describe the processes of mitosis and meiosis 
2. explain the basic rules and processes associated with the transmission of genetic characteristics 
3. explain classical genetics at the molecular level. 

 
66/  Biology 30 Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–C1.1k define and explain the significance of chromosome number in somatic and sex cells;  
i.e., haploidy, diploidy and polyploidy 
30–C1.2k  explain, in general terms, the events of the cell cycle; i.e., interphase, mitosis and 
cytokinesis 
30–C1.3k describe the process of meiosis (spermatogenesis and oogenesis) and the necessity for the 
reduction of chromosome number 
30–C1.4k  compare the processes of mitosis and meiosis  
30–C1.5k describe the processes of crossing over and nondisjunction and evaluate their significance 
to organism inheritance and development 
30–C1.6k compare the formation of fraternal and identical offspring in a single birthing event 
30–C1.7k describe the diversity of reproductive strategies by comparing the alternation of 
generations in a range of organisms; e.g., Daphnia, sea anemone, moss, pine. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–C1.1sts explain that science and technology are developed to meet societal needs and expand 
human capability (SEC1) 
• discuss the role of mitosis and biotechnology in regenerating whole, damaged or 
missing parts of organisms (stem cells, skin tissue) 
• evaluate how knowledge of cell division or development of nanotechnology might be 
applied to the regulation of cancerous growth in plants or animals  
• discuss and assess the impact of research in plant and animal reproduction on our 
understanding of mitosis and meiosis in humans (cloning, chromosome shortening) 
• discuss the types and sources of teratogenic compounds found in the environment and 
the technological means by which they can be removed or controlled to ensure quality 
of life for future generations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will describe the processes of mitosis and meiosis. 
 

Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology Biology 30  /67 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–C1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• define questions related to mitosis and meiosis, such as chromosome shortening, 
conditions/stimuli for meiosis, aging and mitosis, cytokinesis (IP–NS1). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–C1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• perform a simulation to demonstrate the behaviour of chromosomes during mitosis  
(PR–NS3) 
• use a microscope and prepared slides of onion root tip cells to identify the stages of a 
cell cycle and calculate the duration of each stage (PR–NS3, AI–NS2) 
• research and compare a range of reproductive strategies in organisms and present them 
in the form of charts, tables or diagrams; e.g., binary fission, budding, the sexual and 
asexual phases of alternation of generations (PR–NS1, PR–NS4) [ICT C6–4.3] 
• prepare microscope slides to demonstrate some stages of mitosis and meiosis  
(PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–C1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions 
• prepare and interpret models of human karyotypes by using hard-copy or online 
resources (AI–NS2)  
• analyze the similarities and differences of cell division in plants and animals (AI–NS2) 
[ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will describe the processes of mitosis and meiosis. 
 

 
68/  Biology 30 Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–C1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• work collaboratively in the preparation of mitosis slides (CT–NS1) 
• present two contrasting reproductive strategies, emphasizing the differences  
(CT–ST2) [ICT C1–4.4]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will describe the processes of mitosis and meiosis. 
 

Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology Biology 30  /69 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–C2.1k describe the evidence for dominance, segregation and the independent assortment of genes 
on different chromosomes, as investigated by Mendel 
30–C2.2k compare ratios and probabilities of genotypes and phenotypes for dominant and recessive, 
multiple, incompletely dominant, and codominant alleles 
30–C2.3k explain the influence of gene linkage and crossing over on variability 
30–C2.4k explain the relationship between variability and the number of genes controlling a trait; 
e.g., one pair of genes, as for Rh factor, versus two or more pairs of genes, as for skin 
colour and height 
30–C2.5k compare the pattern of inheritance produced by genes on the sex chromosomes to that 
produced by genes on autosomes, as investigated by Morgan and others. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–C2.1sts explain that decisions regarding the application of scientific and technological 
development involve a variety of perspectives, including social, cultural, environmental, 
ethical and economic considerations (SEC4b) [ICT F2–4.2, F3–4.1] 
• evaluate the needs and interests of society and the role of genetic counselling and 
technology in the identification and treatment of potentially disabling genetic 
disorders (phenylketonuria, cystic fibrosis, germ-cell modification) 
• discuss the contributions of Aboriginal peoples in the development of early plant 
hybrids 
• discuss the application of genetic crosses in the development of specific breeds or 
hybrids (wheat and corn). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the basic rules and processes associated with the transmission of genetic 
characteristics. 

 
70/  Biology 30 Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–C2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• design a plan for collecting data to demonstrate human inheritance (IP–NS2). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–C2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• perform an experiment to demonstrate inheritance of a trait controlled by a single pair 
of genes; e.g., albino corn, Drosophila or Arabidopsis (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4) 
• design and perform an experiment to demonstrate that an environmental factor can 
cause a change in the expression of genetic information in an organism (IP–NS2,  
IP–NS3, IP–NS4, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) [ICT F1–4.2]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–C2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• interpret patterns and trends of inheritance of traits and predict, quantitatively, the 
probability of inheritance of traits illustrated in monohybrid, dihybrid and sex-linked 
inheritance, using pedigrees and Punnett squares [ICT C7–4.2] 
• perform experiments to record and explain predicted phenotypic ratios versus actual 
counts in genetic crosses to show a relationship between chance and genetic results 
(PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, AI–NS3) 
• draw and interpret pedigree charts from data on human single-allele and multiple-allele 
inheritance patterns; e.g., hemophilia, blood types (PR–NS4, AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze crossover data for a single pair of chromosomes to create a chromosome map 
showing gene arrangement and relative distance (AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• identify limitations of data associated with phenotypic ratios for small populations in 
which the ratios may not conform with the theoretical ratios expected (AI–NS4). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–C2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results 
• work cooperatively with team members to investigate a monohybrid cross (tongue 
rolling, attached earlobes) and solve problems as they arise (CT–NS1, CT–NS2). 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the basic rules and processes associated with the transmission of genetic 
characteristics. 

Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology Biology 30  /71 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–C3.1k summarize the historical events that led to the discovery of the structure of the DNA 
molecule, including the work of Franklin and Watson and Crick 
30–C3.2k describe, in general, how genetic information is contained in the sequence of bases in DNA 
molecules in chromosomes and how the DNA molecules replicate themselves 
30–C3.3k describe, in general, how genetic information is transcribed into sequences of bases in 
RNA molecules and is finally translated into sequences of amino acids in proteins 
30–C3.4k explain, in general, how restriction enzymes cut DNA molecules into smaller fragments 
and how ligases reassemble them 
30–C3.5k explain, in general, how cells may be transformed by inserting new DNA sequences into 
their genomes 
30–C3.6k explain how a random change (mutation) in the sequence of bases results in abnormalities 
or provides a source of genetic variability 
30–C3.7k explain how base sequences in nucleic acids contained in the nucleus, mitochondrion and 
chloroplast give evidence for the relationships among organisms of different species. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–C3.1sts explain that science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F3–4.1] 
• discuss the implications for society of corporations being able to patent genes, such as 
the gene for herbicide resistance in canola 
• assess the concerns and benefits of genetically modified organisms, such as transgenic 
food organisms or tree cloning for reforestation 
 
30–C3.2sts explain that scientific research and technological development help achieve a sustainable 
society, economy and environment (SEC4a) [ICT F2–4.2, F2–4.8] 
• discuss the Human Genome Project and the potential of proteomic technologies, in 
terms of the needs, interests and financial support of society  
• discuss biotechnology and gene replacement therapy in the treatment of human genetic 
disorders  
• assess the impact and value of DNA sequencing on the study of genetic relationships 
and variations in population ecology 
• explore the application of nanotechnology and its implications for clinical diagnostics, 
pharmacology, biological research or proteomic programs. 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain classical genetics at the molecular level. 

 
72/  Biology 30 Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–C3.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• design an experiment to identify the proteins produced in a cell at a particular point in 
time or development (IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–C3.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• construct models of DNA to demonstrate the general structure and base arrangement 
(PR–ST2) [ICT C6–4.4] 
• perform simulations to demonstrate the replication of DNA and the transcription and 
translation of its information (PR–NS2, PR–NS4) 
• perform simulations to demonstrate the use of restriction enzymes and ligases  
(PR–NS3, PR–NS4) 
• perform an investigation to extract DNA from cells in green peas, beans, bananas or 
onions (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• research gel electrophoresis techniques and their applications in medical diagnostics 
and forensics (PR–ST1). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–C3.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• analyze, from published data, relationships between human activities and changes in 
genetic information that lead to heritable mutations and cancer (AI–NS2)  
[ICT C7–4.2] 
• analyze DNA fingerprints (AI–NS2) 
• compare and contrast homologous DNA sequences to infer ancestry of various species 
(AI–NS2). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–C3.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results 
• work cooperatively with team members to investigate the impact of an environmental 
factor on the expression of a gene and to solve problems as they arise (CT–NS1)  
• debate the advantages and disadvantages of corporate funding and patenting of 
genetic research results, including Aboriginal and other perspectives of ownership  
(CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4]. 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain classical genetics at the molecular level. 

Unit C:  Cell Division, Genetics and Molecular Biology Biology 30  /73 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1 
 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Ratios and Probability Grade 8 Mathematics, Number, Specific Outcomes 4 and 5; 
Grade 8 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Chance and 
 Uncertainty), Specific Outcome 2; 
Mathematics 30-2, Probability, Specific Outcomes 1 and 3; 
Mathematics 30-3, Probability, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit C but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 

 
74/  Biology 30 Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 
Themes:  Systems, Equilibrium and Change 
 
Overview:  Population change over time can be examined through a study of population genetics 
(Hardy-Weinberg principle) and population growth.  Both of these can be expressed quantitatively.  
Individual members of populations interact with each other as well as with members of other populations, 
which can have an impact on the populations involved.  Communities are a sum of all the different 
populations living together.  Communities may change over time as a result of natural or artificial events. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity  
• Biology 20, Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere and Unit B:  Ecosystems and 
Population Change 
 
Unit D will require approximately 15% of the time allotted for Biology 30. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 81. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How does one determine if populations are changing over time?  In what ways 
may individual members of a population interact with one another or with members of a different 
population?  What quantitative measures indicate that populations change over time?  What role does 
society play in managing wildlife populations? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are three major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• Hardy-Weinberg principle  • determiners of population size:  natality, mortality, 
immigration, emigration 
• population growth rate and population growth 
curves 
• r- and K-selected reproductive strategies 
• gene pool 
• natural selection 
• symbiotic relationships and other 
interactions 
• succession 
1. describe a community as a composite of populations in which individuals contribute to a gene 
pool that can change over time 
2. explain the interaction of individuals in a population with one another and with members of other 
populations 
3. explain, in quantitative terms, the change in populations over time. 

Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics Biology 30  /75 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–D1.1k describe the Hardy-Weinberg principle and explain its significance in population  
gene-pool stability and nonequilibrium values 
30–D1.2k describe the factors that cause the diversity in the gene pool to change; i.e., natural 
selection, genetic drift, gene flow, nonrandom mating, bottleneck effect, founder effect, 
migration, mutation 
30–D1.3k apply, quantitatively, the Hardy-Weinberg principle to observed and published data to 
determine allele and genotype frequencies, using the equations p + q = 1 and  
p
2 
+ 2pq + q
2 
= 1 
30–D1.4k describe the molecular basis of gene-pool change and the significance of these changes 
over time; i.e., mutations and natural selection (e.g., drug-resistant bacteria, herbicide-
resistant plants). 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–D1.1sts explain that science and technology have both intended and unintended consequences for 
humans and the environment (SEC3) [ICT F3–4.1]  
• discuss the introduction of exotic species into new ecosystems 
• discuss the development of ecological reserves to preserve gene-pool diversity 
• assess the bottleneck effect characteristic of small populations, such as in whooping 
crane and swift fox populations, and suggest strategies to counteract it 
• investigate the role of gene banks in the preservation of endangered species and 
genotypes, particularly of plants and animals used in agriculture 
• assess habitat loss and the responsibility of society to protect the environment for 
future generations 
 
30–D1.2sts explain how concepts, models and theories are often used in interpreting and explaining 
observations and in predicting future observations (NS6a) 
• assess the role and importance of models in ecology, such as the Hardy-Weinberg 
principle, in explaining scientific phenomena such as changes in gene frequencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will describe a community as a composite of populations in which individuals contribute to a 
gene pool that can change over time. 
 

 
76/  Biology 30 Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–D1.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• identify a question about the resistance of bacteria to specific antibiotics or about the 
resistance of plants to specific herbicides (IP–NS1). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–D1.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information  
• design and perform an investigation and/or a computer simulation to demonstrate 
population growth and gene-pool change (IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4, PR–NS3,  
PR–NS4, PR–NS5) [ICT C6–4.4, F1–4.2] 
• research, integrate and synthesize information on a related topic, such as: 
− the development and persistence of deleterious genes in gene pools  
− the development of bacterial resistance to antibiotics (PR–NS1) [ICT C7–4.2]. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–D1.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• calculate and interpret results based on the Hardy-Weinberg principle in 
problem-solving exercises (AI–NS6) [ICT C6–4.1]. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–D1.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• use appropriate notation and significant digits to show gene frequency and changes in 
gene frequency over time (CT–NS2). 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 1 
Students will describe a community as a composite of populations in which individuals contribute to a 
gene pool that can change over time. 
 

Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics Biology 30  /77 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–D2.1k describe the basis of species interactions and symbiotic relationships and describe the 
influence of these interactions on population changes; i.e., 
• predator-prey and producer-consumer relationships 
• symbiotic relationships:  commensalism, mutualism and parasitism  
• interspecific and intraspecific competition  
30–D2.2k explain the role of defence mechanisms in predation and competition; e.g., mimicry, 
protective coloration, toxins, behaviour 
30–D2.3k explain how mixtures of populations that define communities may change over time or 
remain as a climax community; i.e., primary succession, secondary succession. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Social and Environmental Contexts 
Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–D2.1sts explain why Canadian society supports scientific research and technological development 
to facilitate a sustainable society, economy and environment (SEC4a) [ICT F2–4.2,  
F2–4.8] 
• discuss public support for scientific work done on predator-prey relationships as part 
of wildlife management in national and provincial parks, such as the introduction of 
wolves 
• identify examples of wildlife management techniques used by Aboriginal peoples 
• assess the long-term implications of fire control and prevention on population and 
ecosystem stability, diversity and productivity 
• assess the impact of parasites on populations and how this impact could be reduced, 
considering examples such as liver flukes in elk and lungworms in bighorn sheep. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the interaction of individuals in a population with one another and with members of 
other populations. 
 

 
78/  Biology 30 Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Social and Environmental Contexts Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–D2.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues  
• plan an investigation of species interaction in a national park or wilderness area  
(IP–NS2, IP–NS3). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–D2.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information 
• design and perform an experiment or a simulation to demonstrate interspecific and 
intraspecific competition (IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• design and perform an experiment to demonstrate succession in a micro-environment 
and record the pattern of succession over time; e.g., hay infusion (IP–NS2, IP–NS3, 
IP–NS4, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• perform simulations to investigate relationships between predators and their prey; e.g., 
computer simulation, role-playing (PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–D2.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• summarize and evaluate a symbiotic relationship (PR–NS1, AI–NS6) 
• research and analyze the effects of clearcutting versus selective logging practices on 
ecosystems (PR–SEC1, AI–SEC2). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–D2.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results  
• research and present practical solutions for reducing the impact of highway fencing on 
animals in Banff and Jasper National Parks (CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2) [ICT C1–4.4] 
• develop, present and defend a position on whether organisms should be deliberately 
introduced into new environments ( CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2) [ICT C1–4.4, C7–4.2] 
• research and present characteristics of interrelationships between organisms for 
analysis by classmates (CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2) [ICT C1–4.4, C7–4.2]. 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed.
General Outcome 2 
Students will explain the interaction of individuals in a population with one another and with members of 
other populations. 
 

Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics Biology 30  /79 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Knowledge 
 
Students will: 
30–D3.1k describe and explain, quantitatively, factors that influence population growth; i.e.,  
• mortality, natality, immigration, emigration 
• change in population size, ∆N = [natality + immigration] – [mortality + emigration] 
30–D3.2k describe the growth of populations in terms of the mathematical relationship among 
carrying capacity, biotic potential, environmental resistance and the number of individuals 
in the population; i.e.,  
• growth rate, gr = 
t
N
∆
∆
, where ∆N is the change in number of individuals in a 
population and ∆t is change in time 
• per capita growth rate, cgr =
N
N
∆
, where ∆N is the change in number of individuals in 
a population relative to N, the original number of individuals  
• population density, D
p
 =
A
N
, or D
p
 =
V
N
, where N is the number of individuals in a 
given space, A is the area, and V is the volume  
30–D3.3k explain the different population growth patterns; i.e., 
• logistic growth pattern (S-shaped curve) and exponential growth pattern (J-shaped 
curve) 
• open and closed populations 
30–D3.4k describe the characteristics and reproductive strategies of r-selected and K-selected 
organisms. 
 
Specific Outcomes for Science, Technology and Society (STS) (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Students will: 
30–D3.1sts explain how concepts, models and theories are often used in interpreting and explaining 
observations and in predicting future observations (NS6a) 
• develop appropriate investigative strategies, such as a risk-benefit analysis or 
cost-benefit analysis, for analyzing biological issues  
• compare the growth of the human population with that of populations of other species. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain, in quantitative terms, the change in populations over time. 
 

 
80/  Biology 30 Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Outcomes for Skills (Nature of Science Emphasis) 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
Students will: 
30–D3.1s formulate questions about observed relationships and plan investigations of questions, 
ideas, problems and issues 
• identify questions about factors that affect population growth rates (IP–NS1). 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
Students will: 
30–D3.2s conduct investigations into relationships between and among observable variables and use 
a broad range of tools and techniques to gather and record data and information 
• design and perform an experiment or a computer simulation to demonstrate the effect 
of environmental factors on population growth rate (IP–NS2, IP–NS3, IP–NS4,  
PR–NS3, PR–NS4) [ICT C6–4.4, F1–4.2] 
• monitor a paramecium population over time, using a microscope and a grid slide  
(PR–NS2, PR–NS3, PR–NS4, PR–NS5) 
• research zebra mussel population growth in the Great Lakes (PR–NS1, PR–NS4) 
• research the impact of introduced trout species on populations of native bull trout 
(Salvelinus confluentus) in Alberta’s lakes and streams (PR–NS1). 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
Students will: 
30–D3.3s analyze data and apply mathematical and conceptual models to develop and assess possible 
solutions  
• graph and interpret population growth of r-selected and K-selected organisms  
(AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• calculate and interpret change in population size, growth rate, per capita growth rate 
and population density (AI–NS2, AI–NS3, AI–NS4) 
• compare and evaluate human population growth rates in various countries 
(AI–NS2) [ICT C7–4.2] 
• demonstrate and assess the effect of environmental factors (biotic potential and 
environmental resistance) on population growth curves (AI–NS2, AI–NS6) 
• calculate population growth rate under ideal conditions, given specific parameters  
(AI–NS3, AI–NS4) 
• state a generalization based on data for the growth of a closed population (AI–NS2, 
AI–NS6) 
• explain limitations in identifying changes in populations and explain how traditional 
knowledge can contribute to knowledge about changes (AI–NS4). 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
Students will: 
30–D3.4s work collaboratively in addressing problems and apply the skills and conventions of 
science in communicating information and ideas and in assessing results 
• develop, present and defend a position on Earth’s carrying capacity of Homo sapiens 
(CT–SEC1, CT–SEC2, CT–SEC3) [ICT C1–4.4, C7–4.2]. 
Note:    Some of the outcomes are supported by examples.  The examples are written in italics and do not form part 
of the required program but are provided as an illustration of how the outcomes might be developed. 
General Outcome 3 
Students will explain, in quantitative terms, the change in populations over time. 
 

Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics Biology 30  /81 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concept Mathematics Course, Strand and Specific Outcome 
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
 
Grade 9 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability (Data Analysis), 
 Specific Outcome 3 
 
Measurement and 
Unit Conversions 
 
Mathematics 10C, Measurement, Specific Outcome 2; 
Mathematics 10-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 20-3, Algebra, Specific Outcome 3; 
Mathematics 30-3, Measurement, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Graph Analysis 
 
Mathematics10C, Relations and Functions,  
 Specific Outcomes 1 and 3; 
Mathematics 20-3, Statistics,  Specific Outcome 1; 
Mathematics 30-1, Relations and Functions,  
 Specific Outcomes 9 and 10 ; 
Mathematics 30-2, Relations and Functions,  
 Specific Outcomes 5 and 6 
 
Ratios and Probability Grade 8 Mathematics, Number, Specific Outcomes 4 and 5; 
Grade 8 Mathematics, Statistics and Probability,  
 Specific Outcome 2; 
Mathematics 30-2, Probability, Specific Outcomes 1 and 3; 
Mathematics 30-3, Probability, Specific Outcome 1 
 
Powers Mathematics10C, Algebra and Number, Specific Outcome 3 
 
Solving Equations Mathematics 20-1, Algebra and Number, Specific Outcome 3 
 
 
Links to Mathematics 
The following mathematics outcomes are related to the content of Unit D but are not considered 
prerequisites. 
 