Introduction
The Biology 30 Student-based Performance Standards document is designed to be a tool for 
the classroom teacher. This document is not the program of studies. Rather, it is a document 
intended to provide teachers with examples of some behaviours exhibited by students at the 
acceptable standard and at the standard of excellence for this course. These lists of behaviours 
are neither prescriptive nor exhaustive. This document should be used in conjunction with the 
program of studies.
The relative number of behaviours described in each unit is not an indication of the time 
required. Teachers should be guided by the program of studies, which indicates the time for 
each of the four units. Unit A should be allotted approximately 25% of the time in the course, 
Unit B 20%, Unit C 40%, and Unit D 15%. In addition, the described behaviours span the 
range of cognitive levels (Remembering/Understanding, Applying, Higher Mental Activities). 
Details related to cognitive levels can be found in the Biology 30 Information Bulletin.
Some of the described behaviours cannot be adequately assessed in a paper-and-pencil format, 
especially if the assessment instrument is exclusively machine-scored. However, they are part of 
the program of studies and should be assessed as part of the school-awarded mark in Biology 30.
The statements in this document reflect specific outcomes for knowledge, skills, and STS in the 
Biology 30 program of studies. Where possible, skills and STS outcomes have been integrated 
with related knowledge outcomes rather than being treated separately.
The skills of collaboration, teamwork, and scientific communication are present in every unit of 
the program of studies (skills outcome 1.4s in each unit). It is assumed that Biology 30 students 
at both the acceptable standard and the standard of excellence would display the behaviours 
associated with this skills outcome throughout the course. Therefore, behaviours associated 
with this skills outcome have not been described repeatedly throughout the document.
Many of the standards in this document are related to laboratory activities that are best  
experienced directly by the student. Some of these could be replaced by teacher 
demonstrations, multimedia presentations, or digital simulations, but direct student 
participation in laboratory activities should be maximized, and other substitutes should be used 
only when direct experiences are not possible for safety or environmental reasons. 
For more information, contact
Shannon Mitchell
Biology 30 Exam Manager
780-415-6122
or Shannon.Mitchell@gov.ab.ca
or Claudine Coleman
Biology 30 Examiner
780-422-4721
or Claudine.Coleman@gov.ab.ca
For toll-free access within Alberta first dial 310-0000.
1Alberta Education, Provincial Assessment Sector  Biology 30