 
74/  Biology 30 Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Unit D:  Population and Community Dynamics 
 
Themes:  Systems, Equilibrium and Change 
 
Overview:  Population change over time can be examined through a study of population genetics 
(Hardy-Weinberg principle) and population growth.  Both of these can be expressed quantitatively.  
Individual members of populations interact with each other as well as with members of other populations, 
which can have an impact on the populations involved.  Communities are a sum of all the different 
populations living together.  Communities may change over time as a result of natural or artificial events. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity  
• Biology 20, Unit A:  Energy and Matter Exchange in the Biosphere and Unit B:  Ecosystems and 
Population Change 
 
Unit D will require approximately 15% of the time allotted for Biology 30. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 81. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How does one determine if populations are changing over time?  In what ways 
may individual members of a population interact with one another or with members of a different 
population?  What quantitative measures indicate that populations change over time?  What role does 
society play in managing wildlife populations? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are three major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• Hardy-Weinberg principle  • determiners of population size:  natality, mortality, 
immigration, emigration 
• population growth rate and population growth 
curves 
• r- and K-selected reproductive strategies 
• gene pool 
• natural selection 
• symbiotic relationships and other 
interactions 
• succession 
1. describe a community as a composite of populations in which individuals contribute to a gene 
pool that can change over time 
2. explain the interaction of individuals in a population with one another and with members of other 
populations 
3. explain, in quantitative terms, the change in populations over time. 