Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration Biology 20  /31 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit C:  Photosynthesis and Cellular Respiration 
 
Themes:  Energy, Matter and Systems 
 
Overview:  The life processes of photosynthesis and cellular respiration allow for the transfer of energy 
and matter.  Students learn, in general terms, how energy from sunlight is transferred into adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and eventually 
into glucose, and how carbohydrates are oxidized to produce reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH), reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH) and eventually ATP.  A detailed knowledge of 
metabolic intermediates is not required. 
 
Students extend their understanding by examining how these cellular processes impact and are impacted 
by global systems. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 7 Science, Unit B:  Plants for Food and Fibre 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
 
Unit C will require approximately 15% of the time allotted for Biology 20. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 36. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How does light energy from the environment enter living systems?  How is the 
energy from light converted to chemical potential in organic matter?  How is the energy in organic matter 
released for use by living systems?  How do humans in their application of technologies impact 
photosynthesis and cellular respiration? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are two major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• absorption of light by pigments • Krebs cycle 
• light-dependent and independent reactions • electron transport systems 
• aerobic and anaerobic respiration • glycolysis 
1. relate photosynthesis to storage of energy in organic compounds 
2. explain the role of cellular respiration in releasing potential energy from organic compounds. 
 