©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /1 
 
    
 
PROGRAM RATIONALE AND 
PHILOSOPHY 
 
Science programs provide opportunities for 
students to develop the knowledge, skills and 
attitudes they need to become productive and 
responsible members of society.  The programs 
also allow students to explore  interests and 
prepare for further education and careers.  
Students graduating from Alberta schools require 
the scientific and related technological knowledge 
and skills that will enable them to understand and 
interpret their world.  They also need to deve lop 
attitudes that will motivate them to use their 
knowledge and skills in a responsible manner.   
 
To become scientifically liter ate, students need to 
develop a knowledge of science and its 
relationship to technologies and society.  They 
also need to deve lop the broad- based skills 
required to identify and analyze problems; to 
explore and test solutions; and to seek, interpret 
and evaluate information.  To ensure relevance to 
students as well as to societal needs, a science 
program must present science in a meaningful 
context—providing opportunities for students to 
explore the process of science, its applications and 
implications, and to examine related technological 
problems and issues.  By doing so, students 
become aware of the role of science in respondin g 
to social and cultural change and in meeting needs 
for a sustainable environment, economy and 
society. 
 
 
Program Vision 
 
The secondary science program is guided by the 
vision that all students, regardless of gender or 
cultural background, are given the opportunity to 
develop scientific literacy.  The goal of scientific 
literacy is to develop in students the 
science-related knowledge, skills and attitudes that 
they need to solve problems and make decisions 
and, at the same time, to help students become 
lifelong learners who maintain their sense of 
wonder about the world around them. 
 
Diverse learning experiences within the science 
program provide students with opportunities to 
explore, analyze and appreciate the 
interrelationships among science, technology, 
society and the environment and to develop 
understandings that will affect their personal lives, 
their careers and their futures. 
 
BIOLOGY 20–30 
Program of Studies 
2007 (Updated 2014) 
Updates 
Minor revisions were made in 2014 and are 
described in 2014 Summary of Updates. 
 