©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /7 
Focusing Questions 
 
These questions frame a context for introducing 
the unit and suggest  a focus for investigative 
activities and application of ideas by students. 
 
Key Concepts 
 
Key concepts identify major ideas to be developed 
in the unit.  Some of the concepts may be 
addressed in additional units of the same course, 
as well as in other cou rses.  The intended scope of 
treatment of these concepts is indicated by the 
outcomes. 
 
Outcomes 
 
Two levels of outcomes are provided in each unit: 
• General Outcomes:  These are the major 
outcomes in the unit that students are to 
demonstrate over the course of their learning.   
• Specific Outcomes:  These are detailed 
outcomes that delineate the scope of each 
general outcome and the unit.  Specific 
outcomes for Knowledge; Science, 
Technology and Society (STS); and Skills are 
identified. 
 
The outcomes are numbe red for the purpose of 
referencing.  This numbering is not intended to 
imply a fixed instructional sequence. 
 
Examples 
 
Many of the outcomes are supported by examples.  
The examples are written in italics and do not 
form part of the required program  but ar e 
provided as an illustration of how the outcomes 
might be developed. 
 
STS Emphases 
 
The specific outcomes for Science, Technology 
and Society (STS) and Skills for each general 
outcome in a unit include one of the following 
emphases: 
• Nature of Science 
• Science and Technology 
• Social and Environmental Contexts 
 
The STS emphases provide opportunities for 
students to develop related concepts and skills as 
outlined on pages 8 to 10. 
 
Additional Links 
 
Links to the STS emphasis frameworks (pages 8 to 
10) are show n in boldface  and (in parentheses) 
after specific outcomes for STS and after specific 
outcomes or examples for Skills.  Links to the 
Division 4 ICT curriculum (pages 11 to 13) are 
shown in boldface and [in brackets] after some of 
the specific outcomes and examples for STS and 
Skills.  The STS and ICT links indicate that the 
concept or skill from the STS emphasis 
framework or the Division 4 ICT outcome has 
been addressed in the specific outcome or 
example. 
 
Note: The listing of STS and ICT links is not 
exhaustive; other links may exist. 
 
Links to Mathematics 
 
The purpose of the links to Mathematics is to 
identify mathematical concepts and skills related 
to science content in the science units of study.   
The mathematics links identify where similar 
concepts an d skills are developed in the 
mathematics programs of study to support making 
connections between mathematics and science 
learning, to build upon previous student learning, 
and to identify possible connections to 
mathematics learning that students may 
encounter.  These links do not represent learning 
outcomes for Science and are not considered 
prerequisites for Alberta science courses. 