Unit D:  Human Systems Biology 20  /37 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada  
Unit D:  Human Systems 
 
Themes:  Energy, Equilibrium, Matter and Systems 
 
Overview:  Maintenance of metabolic equilibrium in organisms involves a number of physical and 
biochemical processes.  The human organism is used as a model system to examine how energy and 
matter are exchanged with the environment through the processes of gas exchange, digestion, excretion, 
circulation and the function of the motor system.  A defence system contributes to equilibrium by 
eliminating pathogenic organisms.  
 
The content in Unit D prepares students for further studies regarding the functioning of human systems. 
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 8 Science, Unit B:  Cells and Systems 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
 
Unit D will require approximately 40% of the time allotted for Biology 20. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 47. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How do specialized structures function in the overall biochemical balance of the 
living system?  What conditions result if these structures do not function normally?  How does 
knowledge of living systems and medical technology support the prevention and treatment of disorders? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are four major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• structure and function of major systems:  
respiratory, digestive, excretory, 
circulatory and motor  
• chemical nature of carbohydrates, proteins, 
lipids 
• chemical and physical digestion  
 
• digestive enzymes 
• gas exchange 
• composition of blood 
• immune response 
• renal function 
• muscle contraction 
 
 
 
 
 
1. explain how the human digestive and respiratory systems exchange energy and matter with the 
environment 
2. explain the role of the circulatory and defence systems in maintaining an internal equilibrium 
3. explain the role of the excretory system in maintaining an internal equilibrium in humans through 
the exchange of energy and matter with the environment 
4. explain the role of the motor system in the function of other body systems. 