6/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Social and Environmental Contexts  
 
The history of science shows that scientific 
development takes place within a social context.  
Many examples can be used to show that cultural 
and intellectual traditions have influ enced the 
focus and methodologies of science, and that 
science in turn has influenced the wider world of 
ideas. 
 
Today, research is often driven by societal and 
environmental needs and issues.  As technological 
solutions have emerged from previous research , 
many of the new technologies have given rise to 
complex social and environmental issues.  
Increasingly, these issues are becoming part of the 
political agenda.  The potential of science to 
inform and empower decision making by 
individuals, communities and society is central to 
scientific literacy in a democratic society. 
 
Foundation 4:  Skills 
 
Foundation 4 is concerned with the skills that 
students develop in answering questions, solving 
problems and making decisions.  While these 
skills are not unique t o science, they play an 
important role in the development of scientific 
understandings and in the application of science 
and technology to new situations.  Four broad skill 
areas are outlined in the secondary science 
program.  Each skill area is developed at each 
level with increasing scope and complexity of 
application. 
 
Initiating and Planning 
 
These are the skills of questioning, identifying 
problems and developing preliminary ideas and 
plans. 
 
Performing and Recording 
 
These are the skills of carrying o ut a plan of 
action that include gathering evidence by 
observation and, in most cases, manipulating 
materials and equipment. 
 
Analyzing and Interpreting 
 
These are the skills of examining information and 
evidence; of processing and presenting data so 
that they can be interpreted; and of interpreting, 
evaluating and applying the results. 
 
Communication and Teamwork 
 
In science, as in other areas, communication skills 
are essential at every stage during which ideas are 
being developed, tested, interpreted, debated and 
agreed upon.  Teamwork skills are also important, 
as the development and application of science 
ideas are collaborative processes both in society 
and in the classroom. 
 
 
PROGRAM ORGANIZATION 
 
Attitude Outcomes 
 
A listing of Attitude outcomes is included at the 
beginning of each of the 20- level and 30- level 
courses in the senior high school sciences 
program.  These specific outcomes are to be 
developed throughout the particular course in 
conjunction with the specific outcomes for 
Knowledge, STS and Skills listed within each unit 
of study. 
 
Units of Study 
 
In the senior high school sciences program, four 
units of study are outlined for each course.  Each 
unit in the 20- level and 30- level courses includes 
the following components. 
 
Themes 
 
Themes are the major ideas of science that 
transcend topics of study. 
 
Overview 
 
The overview introduces the contents of the unit 
and suggests an approach to unit development. 
 