4/  Biology 20–30 ©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada 
Foundation 1:  Attitudes 
 
Foundation 1 is concerned with the generalized 
aspects of behaviour that are commonly referred 
to as attitudes.  Attitude outcomes are of a 
different form than outcomes for skills and 
knowledge:  they are exhibited in a different way, 
and they are rooted more deeply in the 
experiences that students bring to school.  Attitude 
development is a lifelong process that involves the 
home, the school, the community and society at 
large.  Attitudes are best shown not by the events 
of a particular moment but by the pattern of 
behaviours over time.  Development of positive 
attitudes plays an important role in student growth 
by interacting with students’ intellectual 
development and by creating a readiness for 
responsible application of what is learned.
 
 
Interest in Science 
 
Students will  be encouraged to develop 
enthusiasm and continuing interest in the study of 
science. 
 
Mutual Respect 
 
Students will  be encouraged to appreciate that 
scientific understanding evolves from the 
interaction of ideas involving people with 
different views and backgrounds. 
 
Scientific Inquiry 
 
Students will be encouraged to develop attitudes 
that support active inquiry, problem solving and 
decision making. 
 
Collaboration 
 
Students will  be encouraged to develop attitudes 
that support collaborative activity. 
 
Stewardship 
 
Students will  be encouraged to develop 
responsibility in the application of science and 
technology in relation to society and the natural 
environment. 
 
Safety 
 
Students will  be encouraged to demonstrate a 
concern for safety in science and technology 
contexts. 
 
Foundation 2:  Knowledge 
 
Foundation 2 focuses on the subject matter of 
science, including the laws, theories, models, 
concepts and principles that are essential to an 
understanding of each science area.  For 
organizational purposes, this foundation is framed 
using widely accepted science disciplines. 
 
Life Science 
 
Life science deals with the growth and 
interactions of life forms within their 
environments in ways that reflect their 
uniqueness, diversity, genetic continuity and 
changing nature.  Life science includes such fields 
of s tudy as ecosystems, biological diversity, 
organisms, cells, biochemistry, genetic 
engineering and biotechnology. 
 
Physical Science 
 
Physical science, which encompasses chemistry 
and physics, deals with matter, energy and forces.  
Matter has structure, and there are interactions 
among its components.  Energy links matter to 
gravitational, electromagnetic and nuclear forces 
in the universe.  Physical science also addresses 
the conservation laws of mass and energy, 
momentum and charge. 
 
Earth and Space Science 
 
Earth and space science brings global and 
universal perspectives to student knowledge.  The 
planet Earth exhibits form, structure and patterns 
of change, as does the surrounding solar system 
and the physical universe beyond it.  Earth and 
space science i ncludes such fields of study as 
geology, meteorology and astronomy. 
 