©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada Biology 20–30  /5 
Themes are the major ideas of science and 
technology that transcend discipline boundaries 
and demonstrate unity among the natural sciences.  
Six themes have been identified for the senio r 
high school sciences program. 
 
Change 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
How all natural entities are modified over time, 
how the direction of change might be predicted 
and, in some instances, how change can be 
controlled. 
 
Diversity 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The array of living and nonliving forms of matter 
and the procedures used to understand, classify 
and distinguish these forms of matter on the basis 
of recurring patterns. 
 
Energy 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The capacity for doing work that drives much of 
what takes place in the universe through its variety 
of interconvertible forms. 
 
Equilibrium 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The state in which opposing forces or processes 
balance in a static or dynamic way. 
 
Matter  
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The constituent parts, and the variety of states, of 
the material in the physical world. 
 
Systems 
Students will develop an understanding of: 
The interrelated groups of things or events that 
can be defined by their boundaries and, in some 
instances, by their inputs and outputs. 
 
 
Foundation 3:  Science, Technology and 
Society (STS) 
 
Foundation 3 is concerned with understanding the 
scope and character of science, its connections to 
technology and the social context in which it is 
developed.  The following is a brief introduction 
to the major ideas underlying this component of 
the program.   
 
Nature of Science 
 
Science provides an ordered way of learning about 
the nature of things, based on observat ion and 
evidence.  Through science, we explore our 
environment, gather knowledge and develop ideas 
that help us interpret and explain what we see.  
Scientific activity provides a conceptual and 
theoretical base that is used in predicting, 
interpreting and explaining natural and 
technological phenomena.  Science is driven by a 
combination of specific knowledge, theory, 
observation and experimentation.  Science -based 
ideas are continually being tested, modified and 
improved as new knowledge and explanations 
supersede existing knowledge and explanations. 
 
Science and Technology 
 
Technology is concerned with solving practical 
problems that arise from human needs.  
Historically, the development of technology has 
been strongly linked to the development of 
science, with each making contributions to the 
other.  While there are important relationships and 
interdependencies, there are also important 
differences.  Whereas the focus of science is on 
the development and verification of knowledge, 
the focus of technology i s on the development of 
solutions, involving devices and systems that meet 
a given need within the constraints of a problem.  
The test of scientific knowledge is that it helps us 
explain, interpret and predict; the test of 
technology is that it works —it en ables us to 
achieve a given purpose. 
 