Unit B:  Reproduction and Development   Biology 30  /57 
©Alberta Education, Alberta, Canada   
Unit B:  Reproduction and Development   
 
Themes:  Change and Systems 
 
Overview:  This unit investigates the human reproductive system as a representative mammalian system 
responsible for propagating the organism and perpetuating the species.  The processes associated with 
human reproduction and development, as well as the regulation of these processes by hormones, are 
reviewed.  The influence of environmental factors on embryonic and fetal development is examined, as 
are various reproductive technologies.   
 
This unit builds on: 
• Grade 8 Science, Unit B:  Cells and Systems 
• Grade 9 Science, Unit A:  Biological Diversity 
• Science 10, Unit C:  Cycling of Matter in Living Systems 
• Biology 20, Unit D:  Human Systems 
 
Unit B will require approximately 20% of the time allotted for Biology 30. 
 
Links to Mathematics:  Refer to page 64. 
 
Focusing Questions:  How do the reproductive systems function to ensure survival of the species?  What 
mechanisms are responsible for regulating the reproductive systems?  What are the major processes and 
events of human embryonic and fetal development?  How do reproductive technologies affect 
functioning of the reproductive systems, and what impact do these technologies have on society? 
 
General Outcomes:  There are three major outcomes in this unit. 
 
Students will:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Concepts:  The following concepts are developed in this unit and may also be addressed in other 
units or in other courses.  The intended level and scope of treatment is defined by the outcomes. 
• male and female reproductive systems 
• reproductive hormones 
• reproductive technologies 
 
• embryonic and fetal development 
• parturition 
• lactation 
 
 
1. explain how survival of the human species is ensured through reproduction 
2. explain how human reproduction is regulated by chemical control systems 
3. explain how cell differentiation and development in the human organism are regulated by a 
combination of genetic, endocrine and environmental factors. 
 