1

Men Must Pay for Evil They Do...
Tom Barrett

The  desperate  campaign to  prevent  the  restoration  of  capital  punishment is  producing some  of
the most inflammatory and emotional rhetoric heard in many years.
On  the  editorial  pages  of The  Journal,  MPs  who  support  the  death  penalty  have been
condemned as unprincipled opportunists, ready to string up prisoners in order to pander to public
bloodlust,  and  the  views  of  the  vast  majority  of  ordinary  citizens  who  stubbornly  maintain  that
our  very  worst  criminals  should  be  executed,  have  been  reportedly  branded  as  ignorant,
uncivilized or worse.
Attacks  of  this  nature  do  no  credit  to  the  abolitionist  cause or  to  the  people  who  make
them, but we really shouldn’t be surprised to read them. The mud being slung is a little thicker,
the  pomposity  a  tad  more  overbearing  perhaps, but  the  attempt  to  shame  and  intimidate  those
who believe justice demands the return of the death penalty is an all-too familiar feature of this
“debate,” and one that demands a response.
Like most Canadians, I prefer to live in a community that is angry at the Clifford Olsons
and Bill  Tames,  rather  than  one  anxious  to  extend  unwarranted  sympathy  to  men who  have
committed  the  most heinous crimes.  There  is  nothing  sick  or  shameful  in  such  anger,  or  in  the
belief  that  death  is  the  only  fit  penalty  for  the  crimes  such  men  have  committed.  The  fact  that
most  citizens  still  insist  on  the  ultimate  penalty  for  ultimate  crimes  is  a  sign  of the  continuing
moral health of our community, not of a wanton desire for blood.
Their  anger  is  not a  selfish,  narrow  passion,  but  a  reflection  of  the  fundamental  human
belief  that  men  must  pay  for  the  evil  they  do;  that  those  who  commit  violent  acts  against  any
member  of  our  community  do  violence  to  us  all,  and,  in  the  case  of  men  like Olson  or Charles
Manson,  any  penalty  less than  death  is  inadequate.  The  continued  existence  of  men  such  as
Manson, who now amuses himself by selling his obnoxious ravings to newspapers, is an insult to
all  law-abiding  citizens.  As  former University of  Toronto  professor  Walter  Berns  has  written,
execution is  a  terrible  penalty,  but  there  are  terrible  crimes.  By  not  punishing  the  most  grave
offences harshly, we send the message that we do not consider them grave.
Obviously the anger we feel towards violent criminals must be properly tamed in a court
of law, which, far from the heat of passion, ultimately expresses it as the denunciation of society.
Yet we must never forget the fundamental connection between anger and justice. A community
which  deals  with  criminal  activity on  a mere  calculation  of  mutual  self-interest,  wholly  bare  of
moral  indignation,  is  an  impoverished  community  indeed,  and  not  the  kind  most  of  us  would
choose to live in.
Yet  that  is  the  supposedly  compassionate  society  some  critics  of  capital  punishment
advocate—one in  which  moral  indignation  is  discarded  as  irrational  and  compassion  is  blindly
extended to all, regardless of the offences committed or aggravating circumstances.
But it is those who cloak their own moral uncertainty in pious sentiments about unlimited
compassion and the sacredness of all life whose judgments deserve examination. When the lives
of unspeakably vile men such as Manson or Adolf Hitler are said to be as sacred as that of heroic
men like Gandhi or Martin Luther King,  you can  be sure the word has lost all meaning. This is
not  evidence  of  a  generous  vision,  but  of  a  bankruptcy  of  vision.  The  claim  that  no  crime,
however  heinous,  warrants  execution,  that  absolutely  nothing  is  worth  dying  for,  exalts  mere

2

existence  over  every  other moral  value.  This  is  not  the  compassionate,  progressive  stand  it
masquerades as, but a poverty of values.
Fortunately,  the  vast  majority  of  Canadian  citizens  do  not  share  this  lack  of conviction.
They  continue  to  believe  that we  are  right  and  criminals  are  wrong,  that  both  compassion  and
punishment, sometimes very harsh punishment, have a place in our criminal justice system, and
they are determined to see that our worst criminals are paid back for their actions and receive the
penalty that justice demands.
