1

The Sea Devil
Arthur Gordon

The man came out of the house and stood quite still, listening. Behind him, the lights glowed in
the cheerful room, the books were neat and orderly in their cases, the radio talked importantly to
itself. In front of him, the bay stretched dark and silent, one of the countless lagoons that border
the coast where Florida thrusts its great green thumb into the tropics.
It was late in September. The night was breathless; summer’s dead hand still lay heavy on
the land. The man moved forward six paces and stood on the sea wall. The tide was beginning to
ebb.
Somewhere  out  in  the  blackness  a  mullet  jumped  and  fell  back  with  a  sullen  splash.
Heavy with roe, they were jumping less often, now. They would not take a hook, but a practiced
eye  could  see  the  swirls  they  made  in  the glassy  water.  In  the  dark  of  the  moon,  a  skilled  man
with a cast net might take half a dozen in an hour’s work. And a big mullet makes a meal for a
family.
The man turned abruptly and went into the garage, where his cast net hung. He was in his
late 20s, wide shouldered, and strong. He did not have to fish for a living, or even for food. He
was  a  man  who  worked  with  his head,  not  with  his  hands.  But  he  liked  to  go  casting  alone  at
night.
He liked the loneliness and the labor of it. He liked the clean taste of salt when he gripped
the  edge  of  the  net  with his  teeth  as  a  cast  netter  must.  He  liked  the  arching  flight  of  sixteen
pounds  of  lead  and  linen  against  the  starlight, and  the  weltering  crash  of  the  net  into  the
unsuspecting  water.  He  liked  the harsh  tug  of  the  retrieving  rope  around his  wrist,  and  the  way
the net came alive when the cast was true, and the thud of captured fish on the floorboards of the
skiff.
He liked all that because he found in it a reality that seemed to be missing from his 20
th

century job and from his daily life. He liked being the hunter, skilled and solitary and elemental.
There  was  no  conscious  cruelty  in  the  way he  felt.  It  was  the  way  things  had  been  in  the
beginning.
The  man  lifted  the  net  down  carefully  and  lowered it  into  a  bucket.  He  put  a  paddle
beside the bucket. Then  he went into the house. When he came out, he was wearing swimming
trunks and a pair of old tennis shoes. Nothing else.
The  skiff,  flat-bottomed,  was  moored  off  the  sea  wall.  He  would  not  go  far,  he told
himself. Just to the tumbledown dock half a mile away. Mullet had a way of feeding around old
pilings  after  dark.  If  he  moved  quietly,  he might  pick  up  two  or  three  in  one  cast  close  to  the
dock. And maybe a couple of others on the way down or back.
He  shoved  off  and  stood  motionless  for  a  moment,  letting  his  eyes  grow  accustomed  to
the dark. Somewhere out in the channel a porpoise blew with a sound like steam escaping. The
man smiled a little; porpoises were his friends. Once, fishing in the Gulf, he had seen the charter-
boat captain reach over the side and gaff a baby porpoise through the sinewy part of the tail. He
had  hoisted  it  aboard,  had  dropped  it  into  the  bait  well,  where  it  thrashed around,  puzzled  and
unhappy. And the mother had swum alongside the boat and under the boat and around the boat,
nudging the stout planking with her back, slapping it with her tail, until the man felt sorry for her
and made the captain let the baby porpoise go.

2

He  took  the  net  from  the  bucket,  slipped  the  noose  in  the  retrieving  rope  over  his  wrist,
pulled the slipknot tight.  It was an old net, but still serviceable; he had rewoven the rents made
by  underwater  snags.  He  coiled  the  30-foot rope  carefully,  making  sure  there  were  no  kinks.  A
tangled rope, he knew, would spoil any cast.
The  basic  design  of  the  net  had  not  changed  in  3,000  years.  It  was  a  mesh  circle  with  a
diameter of fourteen feet. It measured close to fifteen yards around the circumference and could,
if  thrown  perfectly, blanket  150  square  feet of  sea  water.  In  the  center  of  this  radial  trap  was  a
small iron collar where the retrieving  rope met the twenty-three separate  drawstrings leading to
the  outer  rim  of  the  net.  Along  this  rim,  spaced  an  inch  and  a  half  apart,  were  the heavy  lead
sinkers.
The man  raised the iron  collar until it was  a foot  above his head. The net  hung soft and
pliant and deadly. He shook it gently, making sure that the drawstrings were not tangled, that the
sinkers were hanging true. He eased it down and picked up the paddle.
The  night  was  black  as  a  witch’s  cat;  the  stars  looked  fuzzy  and  dim.  Down  to  the
southward,  the  lights  of  a causeway  made  a  yellow  necklace  across  the  sky.  To  the  man’s  left
were the tangled roots of a mangrove swamp; to his right, the open waters of the bay. Most of it
was fairly shallow, but there were channels eight feet deep. The man could not see the old dock,
but   he   knew   where   it   was.   He   pulled   the   paddle   quietly   through   the   water,   and   the
phosphorescence glowed died.
For five minutes he paddled. Then, twenty feet ahead of the skiff, a mullet jumped. A big
fish,  close  to  three pounds.  For  a  moment  it  hung  in  the  still  air,  gleaming  dully.  Then  it
vanished. But the ripples marked the spot, and where there was one there were often others.
The man stood up quickly. He picked up the coiled rope, and with the same hand grasped
the net at a point four feet below the iron collar. He raised the skirt to his mouth and gripped it
strongly with his teeth. He slid his free hand as far as it would go down the circumference of the
net so that he had three points of contact with the mass of cordage and metal. He made sure his
feet were planted solidly. Then he waited, feeling the tension that is older than the human race,
the fierce exhilaration of the hunter at the moment of ambush, the atavistic desire to capture and
kill and ultimately consume.
A mullet swirled, ahead and to the left. The man swung the heavy net back, twisting his
body  and  bending  his knees  so  as  to  get  more  upward  thrust.  He  shot  it  forward,  letting  go
simultaneously  with  rope  hand  and  with teeth,  holding  a  fraction  of  a  second  longer  with  the
other hand so as to give the net the necessary spin, impart the centrifugal force that would make
it  flare  into  a  circle.  The  skiff  ducked  sideways,  but  he  kept  his  balance.  The  net fell  with  a
splash.
The man waited for five seconds. Then he began to retrieve it, pulling in a series of sharp
jerks so that the drawstrings would gather the net inward, like a giant fist closing on this segment
of  the  teeming  sea.  He  felt  the net  quiver,  and  knew  it  was  not  empty.  He  swung  it,  dripping,
over  the  gunwale,  saw  the  broad  silver  side  of  the mullet  quivering,  saw  too  the  gleam  of  a
smaller fish. He looked closely to make sure no stingray was hidden in the mesh, then raised the
iron  collar  and  shook  the  net  out.  The  mullet  fell  with  a  thud  and  flapped  wildly.  The other
victim was an angel fish, beautifully marked, but too small to keep. The man picked it up gently
and dropped it overboard. He coiled the rope, took up the paddle. He would cast no more until he
came to the dock.
The  skiff  moved  on.  At  last,  ten  feet  apart  a  pair  of  stakes  rose  up  gauntly  out  of  the
night. Barnacle-encrusted, they once had marked the approach from the main channel. The man

3

guided the skiff between them, then put the paddle down softly. He stood up, reached for the net,
tightened the noose around his wrist. From here he could drift down upon the dock. He could see
it  now,  a  ruined skeleton  in  the  starshine.  Beyond  it  a  mullet  jumped  and fell  back  with  a  flat,
liquid sound. The man raised the edge of the net, put it between his teeth. He would not cast at a
single  swirl,  he  decided;  he  would  wait  until  he  saw  two  or  three  close  together.  The  skiff  was
barely moving. He felt his muscles tense themselves, awaiting the signal from the brain.
Behind him in the channel he heard the porpoise blow again, nearer now. He frowned in
the  darkness.  If  the porpoise  chose  to  fish  this  area,  the  mullet  would  scatter  and  vanish.  There
was no time to lose.
A   school   of   sardines   surfaced   suddenly,   skittering   along   like   drops   of   mercury.
Something,  perhaps  the  shadow  of the  skiff,  had  frightened  them.  The  old  dock  loomed  very
close.  A  mullet  broke  water  just  too  far  away;  then another,  nearer.  The  man  marked  the
spreading ripples and decided to wait no longer.
He swung back the net, heavier now that it was wet. He had to turn his head, but out of
the corner of his eye he saw two swirls in the black water just off the starboard bow. They were
about eight feet apart, and they had the sluggish oily look that marks the presence of something
big just below the surface. His conscious mind had no time to function, but instinct told him that
the net was wide enough to cover both swirls if he could alter the direction of his cast. He could
not halt the swing, but he shifted his feet slightly and made the cast off balance. He saw the net
shoot forward, flare into an oval, and drop just where he wanted it.
Then  the  sea  exploded  in  his  face.  In  a  frenzy  of  spray,  a  great  horned  thing  shot  like  a
huge bat out of the water. The man saw the mesh of his net etched against the mottled blackness
of its body and he knew, in the split second in which thought was still possible, that those twin
swirls had been made not by two mullet, but by the wing tips of the giant ray of the Gulf Coast,
Manta birostris, also known as clam cracker, devil ray, sea devil.
The man gave a hoarse  cry. He tried to claw the slipknot off his wrist, but there was no
time. The quarter-inch line snapped taut. He shot over the side of the skiff as if he had roped a
runaway  locomotive.  He  hit  the  water  headfirst and  seemed  to  bounce  once.  He  plowed  a
blinding furrow for perhaps ten yards. Then the line went slack as the sea devil jumped again. It
was not the full-grown manta of the deep Gulf, but it was close to nine feet from tip to tip and it
weighed  over  a  thousand  pounds.  Up  into  the  air it  went,  its  pearl-colored  underbelly  gleaming
as it twisted in a frantic effort to dislodge the clinging thing that had fallen upon it. Up into the
starlight, a monstrous survival from the dawn of time.
The  water  was  less  than  four  feet  deep.  Sobbing  and  choking,  the  man  struggled  for  a
foothold  on  the  slimy bottom.  Sucking  in  great  gulps  of  air,  he  fought  to  free  himself  from  the
rope.  But  the  slipknot  was  jammed  deep into  his  wrist;  he  might  as  well  have  tried  to  loosen  a
circle of steel.
The ray came down with a thunderous splash and drove forward again.  The flexible net
followed every movement, impeding it hardly at all. The man weighed 175 pounds, and he was
braced  for  the  shock,  and  he  had the  desperate  strength  that  comes  from  looking  into  the  blank
eyes  of  death.  It  was  useless.  His  arm  straightened out  with  a  jerk  that  seemed  to  dislocate  his
shoulder; his feet shot out from under him; his head went under again. Now at last he knew how
the fish must feel when the line tightens and drags him toward the alien element that is his doom.
Now he knew.

4

Desperately  he  dug  the  fingers  of  his  free  hand  into  the  ooze,  felt  them  dredge  a  futile
channel through broken shells and the ribbonlike sea grasses. He tried to raise his head, but could
not get it clear. Torrents of spray choked him as the ray plunged toward deep water.
His eyes were of no use to him in the foam-streaked blackness. He closed them tight, and
at once an insane sequence of pictures flashed through his mind. He saw his wife sitting in their
living room, reading, waiting calmly for his return. He saw the mullet he had just caught, gasping
its  life  away  on  the  floorboards  of  the  skiff. He  saw  all  these  things  and  many  others
simultaneously in his mind as his body fought silently and tenaciously for its existence. His hand
touched something hard and closed on it in a death grip, but it was only the sharp-edged helmet
of a horseshoe crab, and after an instant he let it go.
He  had  been  underwater  perhaps  fifteen  seconds  now,  and  something  in  his  brain  told
him quite calmly that he could last another forty or fifty and then the red flashes behind his eyes
would merge into darkness, and the water would pour into his lungs in one sharp painful shock,
and he would be finished.
This  thought  spurred  him  to  a  desperate  effort.  He  reached  up  and  caught  his  pinioned
wrist  with  his  free  hand.  He doubled  up  his  knees  to  create  more  drag.  He  thrashed  his  body
madly,  like  a  fighting  fish,  from  side  to  side.  This did  not  disturb  the  ray,  but  now  one  of  the
great wings tore through the mesh, and the net slipped lower over the fins projecting like horns
from below the nightmare head, and the sea devil jumped again.
And once more the man was able to get his feet on the bottom and his head above water,
and he saw ahead of him the pair of ancient stakes that marked the approach to the channel. He
knew  that  if  he  was  dragged  much  beyond those  stakes  he  would  be  in  eight  feet  of  water,  and
the ray  would go down to hug the bottom as rays always do, and then no  power on earth could
save him. So in the moment of respite that was granted him, he flung himself toward them.
For a moment he thought his captor yielded a bit. Then the ray moved off again, but more
slowly  now,  and  for  a few  yards  the  man  was  able  to  keep  his  feet  on  the  bottom.  Twice  he
hurled  himself  back  against  the  rope  with  all his  strength,  hoping  that  something  would  break.
But nothing broke. The mesh of the net was ripped and torn, but the draw lines were strong, and
the stout perimeter cord threaded through the sinkers was even stronger.
The man could feel nothing now in his trapped hand; it was numb. But the ray could feel
the powerful lunges of the unknown thing that was trying to restrain it.  It drove its  great wings
against  the  unyielding  water  and  forged ahead,  dragging  the  man  and  pushing a  sullen  wave  in
front of it.
The  man  had  swung  as  far  as  he  could  toward  the  stakes.  He  plunged  toward  one  and
missed  it  by  inches.  His  feet slipped  and  he  went  down  on  his  knees.  Then  the  ray  swerved
sharply and the second stake came right at him. He reached out with his free hand and caught it.
He caught it just above the surface, six or eight inches below high-water mark. He felt the
razor-sharp  barnacles bite  into  his  hand,  collapse  under  the  pressure,  drive  their  tiny  slime-
covered shell splinters deep into his flesh. He felt the pain, and he welcomed it, and he made his
fingers into an iron claw that would hold until the tendons were severed or the skin was shredded
from the bone. The ray felt the pressure increase with a jerk that stopped it dead in the water. For
a moment all was still as the tremendous forces came into equilibrium.
Then the net slipped again, and the perimeter cord came down over the sea devil’s eyes,
blinding it momentarily. The great ray settled to the bottom and braced its wings against the mud
and hurled itself forward and upward.

5

The stake was only  a four-by-four of  creosoted  pine, and it was old. Ten thousand tides
had swirled around it. Worms had bored; parasites had clung. Under the crust of barnacles it still
had some heart left, but not enough. The man’s grip was five feet above the floor of the bay; the
leverage was too great. The stake snapped off at its base.
The ray lunged upward, dragging the man and the useless timber. The man had his lungs
full of air, but when the stake snapped he thought of expelling the air and inhaling the water so as
to  have  it  finished  quickly.  He  thought of  this,  but  he  did  not  do  it.  Then,  just  at  the  channel’s
edge, the ray met the porpoise, coming in.
The porpoise had fed well this night and was in no hurry, but it was a methodical creature
and it intended to make a sweep around the old dock before the tide dropped too low. It had no
quarrel  with  any  ray,  but  it  feared  no  fish in  the  sea,  and  when  the  great  black  shadow  came
rushing blindly and unavoidably, it rolled fast and struck once with its massive horizontal tail.
The blow descended on the ray’s flat body with a sound like a pistol shot. It would have
broken  a  buffalo’s  back, and  even  the  sea  devil  was  half  stunned.  It  veered  wildly  and  turned
back  toward  shallow  water.  It  passed  within ten  feet  of  the  man,  face  down  in  the  water.  It
slowed and almost stopped, wing tips moving faintly, gathering strength for another rush.
The man had heard the tremendous slap of the great mammal’s tail and the snorting gasp
as  it  plunged  away.  He felt  the  line  go  slack  again,  and  he  raised  his  dripping  face,  and  he
reached  for  the  bottom  with  his  feet.  He  found it,  but  now  the  water  was  up  to  his  neck.  He
plucked at the noose once more with his lacerated hand, but there was no strength in his fingers.
He felt the tension come back into the line as the ray began to move again, and for half a second
he  was  tempted  to  throw  himself  backward  and  fight  as  he  had  been  doing,  pitting  his  strength
against the vastly superior strength of the brute.
But the acceptance of imminent death had done something to his brain. It had driven out
the  fear,  and  with  the fear  had  gone  the  panic.  He  could  think  now,  and he  knew  with  absolute
certainty  that  if  he  was  to  make  any  use of  this  last  chance  that  had  been  given  him,  it  would
have to be based on the one faculty that had carried man to his preeminence above all beasts, the
faculty of reason. Only  by using his brain  could he possibly survive,  and  he called on his brain
for a solution, and his brain responded. It offered him one.
He  did  not  know  whether  his  body  still  had  the  strength  to  carry  out  the  brain’s
commands, but he began to swim forward, toward the ray that was still moving hesitantly away
from the channel. He swam forward, feeling the rope go slack as he gained on the creature.
Ahead of him he saw the one remaining stake, and he made himself swim faster until he
was parallel with the ray and the rope trailed behind both of them in a deep U. He swam with a
surge  of desperate  energy  that  came  from nowhere  so  that  he  was  slightly  in  the  lead  as  they
came to the stake. He passed on one side of it; the ray was on the other.
Then the man took one last deep breath, and he went down under the black water until he
was sitting on the bottom of the bay. He put one foot over the line so that it passed under his bent
knee.  He  drove  both  his  heels  into the  mud,  and  he  clutched  the  slimy  grass  with  his  bleeding
hand, and he waited for the tension to come again.
The  ray  passed  on  the  other  side  of  the  stake,  moving  faster  now.  The  rope  grew  taut
again, and it began to drag the man back toward the stake. He held his prisoned wrist close to the
bottom, under his knee, and he prayed that the stake would not break. He felt the rope vibrate as
the barnacles bit into it. He did not know whether the rope would crush the barnacles, or whether
the  barnacles  would  cut  the  rope.  All  he  knew  was  that in  five  seconds  or less  he  would  be
dragged into the stake and cut to ribbons if he tried to hold on, or drowned if he didn’t.

6

He  felt  himself  sliding  slowly,  and  then  faster,  and  suddenly  the  ray  made  a  great  leap
forward,  and  the  rope burned  around  the  base  of  the  stake,  and  the  man’s  foot  hit  it  hard.  He
kicked himself backward with his remaining strength, and the rope parted, and he was free.
He came slowly to the surface. Thirty feet away the sea devil made one tremendous leap
and  disappeared  into  the darkness.  The  man  raised  his  wrist  and  looked  at  the  frayed  length  of
rope  dangling  from  it.  Twenty  inches, perhaps.  He  lifted  his  other  hand  and  felt  the  hot  blood
start instantly, but he didn’t care. He put this hand on the stake above the barnacles and held on
to  the  good  rough,  honest  wood.  He  heard  a  strange  noise,  and  realized  that it  was  himself,
sobbing.
High  above,  there  was  a  droning  sound,  and  looking  up  he  saw  the  nightly  plane  from
New Orleans inbound for Tampa. Calm and serene, it sailed, a symbol of man’s proud mastery
over nature. Its lights winked red and greenfor a moment; then it was gone.
Slowly, painfully, the man began to move through the placid water. He came to the skiff
at  last  and  climbed  into it.  The  mullet,  still  alive,  slapped  convulsively  with  its  tail.  The  man
reached down with his torn hand, picked up the mullet, let it go.
He began to work on the slipknot doggedly with his teeth. His mind was almost a blank,
but not quite. He knew one thing. He knew he would do no more casting alone at night. Not in
the dark of the moon. No, not he.
