1

We Must Not Return to the Noose
Roy Cook

“My  family  deserted  me  and  changed  their  names,  but  I  kept  right  on  with  the  job
because I argued with myself that if I was doing wrong, then the government of the country was
wrong. I held that I was the Minister of Justice at a hanging and that if I was a murderer, then he
was also a murderer...
“I used to say to condemned persons as I beckoned with my hand ‘come with me.’ Now at
night when I lie down, I start up with a roar as victim after victim comes up before me. I can see
them  on  the  trap,  waiting  a  second  before  they  face  their  Maker.  They  taunt  me  and  haunt  me
until I am nearly crazy with an unearthly fear. I am two hundred times a murderer, but I won’t
kill another man.” –John  Robert  Radclive,  1912.  Quoted  by  Frank  W.  Anderson  in A  Concise
History of Capital Punishment in Canada, 1973.

It’s ironic that despite his best efforts, not even Radclive, Canada’s leading public executioner
and  a  man  who  made  his  living  by  hanging  criminals,  could  succeed  in  justifying  the  barbaric
practice of capital punishment.
It’s an immoral, inhuman act. It’s murder committed by a self-righteous society.
Capital  punishment  was  abolished  by  Parliament,  according  to  democratic  process,  in
1976. But a small, opportunistic segment of society won’t allow it to fade into history.
Every time a policeman is killed on duty or a small child is molested and murdered, there
is a groundswell of emotional cries to bring back the death penalty.
A  recent  spate  of  police  murders—including  five  in  Ontario—has  renewed  the  debate
over hanging.
Proponents of capital punishment nobly call for “justice.” In truth, their motive is less
honorable. They want only vengeance.
One  of  the  basic  tenets  of  our  civilized  society  is  that  individuals  have  a  fundamental
right to life. We are taught from childhood that murder is wrong.
Yet  those  who  support  capital  punishment  would  deny  criminals  that  right.  They  would
argue that because one murder has occurred, “justice” dictates that another be committed; that
one moral failure can be compounded by another.
After  the  IRA  bombing  of  a  Brighton  hotel  that  killed  four,  British  Prime  Minister
Margaret Thatcher tried to exploit the sorrow and outrage of Britons in calling for a return of the
death penalty in that nation. She hoped emotion would overwhelm reason.
“People who go out prepared to take lives of other people forfeit their own right to live,”
she said.
Mercifully, not everyone is as bloody-thirsty as the Iron Lady.
In  Canada,  pro-hanging  factions  draw  clear  distinctions  between  those  murderers  who
deserve capital punishment and those who don’t—often, with ludicrous results.
Some advocates say the death penalty should be reserved for the killers of policemen and
prison  guards.  But  that  wrongly  suggests  that a policeman’s life is more sacred than any other
citizen’s.
Others want capital punishment only for psychopathic killers. But to hang the criminally
insane is to punish them for crimes for which they are not responsible.

2

Still another faction wants the death penalty used only in particularly repugnant cases, or
where the murderer is clearly guilty.
It  sounds  like  a  fine,  upright  idea.  But  besides  denying  the  rehabilitative  role  of  prison,
that argument suggests people are being convicted of crimes when there is doubt as to their guilt.
It’s a frightening prospect, but in some cases, that’s exactly what’s happening.
In the past few months,  Canadians have seen several instances  where our  justice system
has erred—where men have been incarcerated for crimes they did not commit.
In Nova Scotia, Donald Marshall served 11 years of a life prison term for murder before
being acquitted in 1982. Wilfred Truscott spent eight months in an Alberta jail for a crime he did
not commit. And a Vancouver man was recently pardoned after serving eight years of a sentence
for rape.
Death  penalty  supporters  will  argue  these  cases  irrelevant—that  the  crimes  for  which
these men were charged would not have been punishable by death.
Yet  Marshall,  Truscott  and  others  are  living  proof  that  our  justice  system  is  fallible.
Mistakes are made, and they are made often.
Just  as  society  has  condemned  innocent  men  to  months  and  perhaps  years  in  prison,  so
too could it sentence them to death for crimes they did not commit.
Victims  of  our  justice  system  can  always  be  released  and  partially  compensated  for  the
time they spent in prison. They cannot be raised from the dead.
Do we really want the power to hang a man knowing that there is a possibility—however
remote—that  he  is  innocent?  Is  our  lust  for vengeance  so  strong  that  it  overwhelms  all  reason
and compassion?
There’s no doubt society has reacted irrationally to many murders.
When Toronto policeman David Dunmore was killed by a man obsessed with the movie
First  Blood,  the  cry  went  out  for  censorship  of  television  and  movies—an  appalling  denial  of
democracy.
Too  often,  we  hear  the  families  of  murder  victims  bemoaning  that  the  killer  will  only
serve 25  years of his life sentence and then be free to kill again. The only  way to prevent other
killings, they say, is to hang him.
Perhaps. But maybe all we need are tougher sentences and restrictions on parole. Would a
man still kill if he knew he would spend the rest of his life in a cell? And wouldn’t society be
satisfied  in  knowing  that  if  a  criminal  is  sentenced  to  15  years  in  prison,  he  would  serve  that
term, rather than being out on mandatory supervision in 10?
Capital  punishment  has  been  called  the  ultimate  deterrent.  Yet  in  places  where  it  is
available, it has not stopped murderers.
California has a death penalty, but that didn’t prevent James Huberty from murdering 21
people in a San Ysidro McDonald’s restaurant. The thought of a Utah firing squad didn’t deter
Gary Gilmore.
No matter what the penalty, murders will always occur.
But  many  could  be  prevented, by tougher gun control. If he hadn’t had access to an
arsenal, James Huberty might not have embarked on his spontaneous shooting spree.
Instead  of  tougher  gun  control,  society  seems  to  be  adopting  a  siege  mentality.  In  the
wake  of  the  cop  killings,  Ottawa  police  have  been  instructed  to  draw  their  guns  in  stopping
suspicious motorists.

3

“We’re hired to protect law-abiding citizens and it’s a very sad day for us to arrive at this
point. It’s no longer safe for a police officer to respond [to a call] in a relaxed fashion,” says
Ottawa Chief Arthur Rice.
The Sherbrooke police force knows that only too well.
Two of its detectives were tried and recently acquitted of charges in connection with the
death of an innocent man last December. During a raid on a motel room, police fired through a
closed  door,  killing  the  sleeping  man.  A  defence  lawyer  at  the  trial  said  the  men  fired  because
they were “afraid for their lives.”
How many Ottawa policemen will be “afraid for their lives” when they stop a suspicious
motorist?
Canada prides itself on being a “just” society. Never have we been so close to dissolving
into barbarism.
