3.

4.

to.

Connection Questions

What “subtle change” does Scout notice in Atticus at the beginning of this
chapter? What other evidence in this chapter supports her observation?

When Scout asks if the Cunninghams are still their friends, Atticus
responds, “Mr. Cunningham’s basically a good man, he just has his blind
spots like the rest of us.” What does Atticus mean by “blind spot”? Do you
agree with Atticus’s assessment of the Cunninghams?

Does the setting in which this story takes place make Mr, Cunningham’s
“blind spot” understandable? What is the difference between
understanding and excusing a point of view?

How does Atticus explain the mob? What does he think the children did
that changed Mr. Cunningham’s mind? Do you think Atticus is right? Is
his understanding of a mob realistic or naive?

Based on what you have learned about the history of lynching, do you
think Harper Lee’s portrayal of the lynch mob in this novel is realistic?
Why or why not?

What groups of people do Scout, Jem, and Dill watch pass by their house
on the way to the courthouse? Which of those groups do you think are
part of Maycomb’s universe of obligation? Which do you think are not?
Why do you think the trial draws so much interest from the people of
Maycomb?

What do we learn about Mr. Dolphus Raymond in this chapter? Which
parts of the story that Jem tells are facts and which are gossip? How can
you tell?

What is a “mixed child,” according to Jem? Why does he think they are
“real sad”? Whose universe of obligation do they belong to?

According to Jem, how does their society define who is black? How does
he answer Scout when she asks how to tell whether or not someone is
black? What does Jem’s answer suggest about the meaning of race?

Scout overhears the members of the “Idlers’ Club” discussing Atticus.
What does she learn about Atticus and Tom Robinson that she did not
know before? What is confusing to her about the revelation? Why,
exactly, are so many townsfolk upset at Atticus?

142 SECTION 5 | Stand Up

1,

2.

3.

6.

9.

10.

Connection Questions

Summarize Heck Tate’s testimony. From his point of view, what happened
on the night of November 21? Why did he arrest Tom Robinson?

Why, according to Tate, did he not call a doctor to examine Mayella
Ewell? Why do you think someone would call a doctor in such a situation?
For what purpose does Tate imply he would have needed to call a doctor?

When he cross-examines Heck Tate, what details about the incident does
Atticus seem to think are most important? How does Harper Lee help the
reader know?

How does Scout feel differently once the trial has started from how
she felt earlier in the morning while thinking about the incident at the
jailhouse? How do you explain the change?

When Bob Ewell is called to the stand, how does Scout describe his
appearance? How does Harper Lee use a stereotype related to his
appearance to suggest something about Mr. Ewell’s character?

What does Scout mean when she tells us that the yard around the Ewells’
cabin looks “like the playhouse of an insane child”? What details does she
provide to further explain this phrase? How is the corner of the yard that
Mayella takes care of different from the rest of the property?

Compare and contrast the description of the Ewells’ home and the black
neighborhood nearby. What similarities do you notice? What differences?
What conclusions might Harper Lee want the reader to draw about the
Ewells and the black families who live nearby based on the descriptions
of where and how they live?

What does Scout explain about the relationship between Atticus and Mr.
Gilmer? What does this suggest about how each views his role in the trial?

Why is Judge Taylor upset about the language that Bob Ewell uses to
answer the lawyers’ questions? Does Mr. Ewell use code-switching? What
does his language suggest about how Harper Lee intends the reader to
view the Ewells?

How does Bob Ewell explain to Atticus why he did not call for a doctor to
examine Mayella? What is Atticus implying by asking both Heck Tate and
Bob Ewell this question?

Teaching MOCKINGBIRD 143

11. What other details in Mr. Ewell’s description of the incident are most
important to Atticus? How does Harper Lee help the reader know?

12, Why does Atticus ask Bob Ewell to write his name? How does this lead
Jem to conclude, “We’ve got him”? Why does Scout think he is jumping
to conclusions?

Connection Questions

1. Mayella Ewell’s testimony reveals to the reader many new details about
the Ewells and their home life. Create identity charts for both Bob and
Mayella Ewell. What do they have in common? How are they different?

2. Why does Mayella say that she is afraid of Atticus when she first takes the
stand? Why does she think Atticus is mocking her as her testimony proceeds?
What does this suggest about the Ewells’ status in Maycomb? What does it
suggest about how the residents of Maycomb have treated them?

3. Reread Mayella’s testimony and record the details of her account of what
happened on November 21. Which details in her story change before the
end of her testimony?

4, What crucial detail is revealed about Tom Robinson in this chapter?
How does it change our understanding of what happened to Mayella on
November 21?

5. What alternative account of the events of November 21 is Atticus
suggesting took place when he asks Mayella, “What did your father see in
the window, the crime of rape” or the best defense of it”? Does he have
sufficient evidence for this suggestion? Why might the jury be willing to
believe what he is suggesting?

Connection Questions

1, Summarize Tom Robinson’s testimony about what happened between
him and Mayella on November 21. How does his account differ from
Mayella’s? Who is telling the truth? How do you know?

2. What new information do we learn about Tom Robinson from his testimony?

* We recommend that teachers review “Discussing Sensitive Topics in the Classroom” on page xv before using these questions in
class.

144 SECTION 5 | Stand Up

3.

4,

7.

2.

Scout says that Tom seemed to be a “respectable Negro.” What does

she mean? How might someone from Maycomb describe the difference
between a black person who is respectable and one who is not? How
might that differ from the characteristics of a “respectable white person”?

What examples does this chapter provide of characters practicing
empathy? Which characters are able to “climb into the skin” of others and
“walk around in it”? How do they respond to others as a result? What are
the consequences?

What are the unwritten rules about race that Mr. Gilmer attempts to get
Tom to break? Does he succeed? What parts of Tom’s testimony would
have offended jurors who supported the laws and customs of segregated
society?

When Mr. Gilmer asks Tom if he ran because he was afraid he would
have to face up to what he did, Tom replies, “No suh, scared Id hafta face
up to what I didn’t do.” What does he mean?

How does Atticus speak to Tom Robinson differently from the way
Mr. Gilmer does? Cite specific examples from the text that show the
difference.

Do you think Tom Robinson’s testimony helps or hurts his chances with
the jury? Did you feel more confident that he would be acquitted before
or after this chapter? Why?

Why does Dill break down crying when Mr. Gilmer questions Tom
Robinson? How does Scout try to comfort Dill? Is Dill being “thin-hided”?

Connection Questions

What secret does Dolphus Raymond reveal to Scout and Dill outside
the courthouse? How does it change the way they think of him? What
is his explanation for why he “deliberately perpetuates a fraud against
himself”? What does Dill learn from him?

Why does Raymond think that children like Scout and Dill can
understand his secret better than adults?

According to Raymond, how will growing up change Scout and Dill?
What will they gain and what will they lose as they get older? Do you
think he’s right?

Teaching MOCKINGBIRD 145

4. During Atticus’s closing speech to the jury, he states, “This case is as
simple as black and white.” Explain the double meaning of this statement.

5. During Atticus’s speech, Scout sees him do two things she had never seen
him do before. What are they, and what do they reveal about how Atticus
thinks this speech is different from others he has given in court in the
past?

6. What distinction does Atticus make in his speech about the written and
unwritten laws of Maycomb? Which does he claim that Mayella Ewell has
violated? How does this help explain why she has falsely accused Tom
Robinson?

7. Atticus challenges the jury to rise above the “evil assumptions” that
Bob and Mayella Ewell are confident that the jury will accept. What
are these “evil assumptions”? How do these assumptions prevent the
jury from seeing Tom Robinson for who he really is? How do these evil
assumptions—or stereotypes—threaten justice?

8. Atticus claims that Mr. Ewell did “what any God-fearing, persevering,
respectable white man would do under the circumstances” when he
turned in Tom Robinson. Why do you think Atticus makes this claim?
Do you think he believes it? Within the “moral universe” of Maycomb, is
accusing Tom Robinson of rape* viewed as respectable?

9. Atticus states, “We all know that all men are not created equal in the
sense that some people would have us believe.” What does he mean?
Where are all men created equal and where are they not, according to
Atticus? What do you think?

10. What role does Atticus believe the courts play in upholding the ideals of
American society?

Connection Questions

1. How do the adults in this chapter respond to Jem’s confidence that
Atticus has won the case? What do they understand that Jem does not?

2. Scout describes the courthouse as the townsfolk await the verdict this
way:

* We recommend that teachers review “Discussing Sensitive Topics in the Classroom” on page xv before using these questions in
class,

146 SECTION 5 | Stand Up

3.

1

But I must have been reasonably awake or I would not have received
the impression that was creeping into me. It was not unlike one I
had last winter, and I shivered, though the night was hot. The feeling
grew until the atmosphere in the courtroom was exactly the same

as a cold February morning, when the mockingbirds were still, and
the carpenters had stopped hammering on Miss Maudie’s new house,
and every wood door in the neighborhood was shut as tightly as the
doors of the Radley place. A deserted, waiting, empty street, and the
courtroom was packed with people.

What is she suggesting about the atmosphere in the courtroom as the jury
deliberates? What is the mood? What are people doing, thinking, and
feeling?

Why does this trial draw so much interest from the town? How do you
think it is different from other trials that had taken place in Maycomb?
How does the book suggest this trial is different even from other cases in
which black men have been accused of committing crimes against white
people?

Reread the last two pages of this chapter and analyze how Harper Lee
reveals the verdict and the reactions of Jem, Scout, and the white and
black townsfolk. How does she underscore the dramatic intensity of
this moment? How does she create the “dreamlike quality” that Scout
mentions?

At the end of the trial, why does Reverend Sykes tell Scout to “stand
up”? What effect does this line have on the reader? Why do you think the
author focuses the reader’s gaze on Atticus and not on Tom Robinson?

Connection Questions

Many view the verdict in the Tom Robinson trial as the climax in To Kill
a Mockingbird’s plot. How does Harper Lee signal the importance of this
event in her writing and in the way that she has constructed the plot?

Sometimes in works of fiction, authors use characters to represent certain
perspectives in society. Instead of asking who a character is, we might
ask what values and beliefs each character represents. Thinking about
the characters who participated in the Tom Robinson trial—Atticus,
Judge Taylor, Mr. Gilmer, Heck Tate, Bob Ewell, Mayella Ewell, and Tom

Teaching MOCKINGBIRD 147

Robinson—what value or belief do you think each represents? How do
these characters represent the tensions in the “moral universe” of the
American South in the 1930s? Which voices in Maycomb society are not
represented?

3. Who or what is the antagonist in To Kill a Mockingbird? How do you
think Atticus would answer that question? Who or what does he see as
his opponent in the Tom Robinson trial?

4. What does the Tom Robinson trial reveal about Maycomb’s universe of
obligation?

5. Compare and contrast Jem’s, Dill’s, and Scout’s reaction to the trial.
What do you think accounts for the different ways each of the children
responds to the trial and the verdict?

6. What is a formative experience? Are the moments you represented on
your memory map at the beginning of your study of To Kill a Mockingbird
formative experiences? Do you think that the Tom Robinson trial will be
a formative experience in the lives of Scout and Jem? If so, how? What
lesson do you think they will take away from the trial?

7. Was the law upheld in the Tom Robinson trial? What effect do the
“unwritten rules” of a society have on the law and the way that it is
upheld? What happens when these unwritten rules are in conflict with
the law?

8. What is justice? What factors limit the legal system’s ability to deliver
justice for Tom Robinson?

9. Atticus and Dolphus Raymond both dissent from the rules of segregation
in their society. How do their approaches differ? Which approach do
you think is more effective? Which approach offers the best chance at
bringing about change? What other approaches might a dissenter take in
that society?

148 SECTION 5 {| Stand Up
