Connections                  Social and Environmental Contexts


Stem Cells
Imagine being able to repair human body parts with tissue grown especially for the
purpose. For instance, people who have had heart attacks could receive new cardiac
(heart) cells. Instead of waiting for organ transplants, people with failing livers,
kidneys, or lungs could have healthy new organs grown for them. People who have
lost the use of their legs through paralysis might be able to walk again with new nerve
cells growing in their spinal cords. The key to these technological feats is stem cells.

What are Stem Cells?                                            research for two reasons: first, it would avoid the ethical
Stem cells are unspecialized or undifferentiated cells. This    issues of embryonic stem cell research, and second, it
means that they have not yet begun to develop into red          could produce repair tissues from a person’s own body
blood cells, muscle cells, or any other of the 200 or so cell   cells that would be a perfect match.
types that make up the human body.                              Stem Cell Research in Canada
     Stem cells have two important features. First, they
                                                                Working together, Alberta-born biophysicist James Till
can replicate (make copies of themselves) for a long
                                                                and Toronto physician Ernest McCulloch discovered
time by dividing. Second, under suitable laboratory
                                                                stem cells in 1960. In 1992, neuroscientist Samuel Weiss
conditions, stem cells can be coaxed to give rise to cells
                                                                of the University of Calgary was the first to show that
with special functions, such as heart muscle cells and
                                                                adult stem cells exist in the human brain. Today, Canada
neurons (nerve cells).
                                                                is still in the forefront of stem cell research. Dr. Weiss, for
     There are two main types of stem cells: adult stem
                                                                example, is now researching how the brain’s stem cells
cells (also called somatic stem cells) and embryonic stem
                                                                could be used to help people who have had strokes.
cells. In spite of their name, adult stem cells are found in
                                                                Meanwhile, researchers at the University of Alberta are
humans of all ages. In fact, one source of adult stem cells
                                                                working on a stem cell treatment for Type 1 Diabetes,
for medical use is the umbilical cords of newborns. Small
                                                                while an Ottawa scientist is working with heart stem cells
numbers of these stem cells have now been found in
                                                                that could be used in the treatment of heart attacks.
many different human organs and tissues.
                                                                      Many important questions about stem cells still
     Embryonic stem cells, as their name implies, come
                                                                remain to be answered. Among them: how many different
from embryos—about four or five days after fertilization.
                                                                types of adult stem cells can be found in the human body,
The source of embryonic stem cells has been an assisted
                                                                and in what tissues? What is the purpose of adult stem
reproduction technique called in vitro fertilization. In
                                                                cells in the body? Why do they remain in an undifferented
this process, embryos are produced in a lab; more are
                                                                state, when all the cells around them have differentiated?
produced than are implanted in the woman who wishes
to become pregnant. Scientists now also have the ability                                     •••
to create embryos solely for research, but many countries,       1. One of the first diseases to be treated with stem cells
including Canada, have banned this technique as unethical.          was leukemia. Research what this treatment was and
     Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent, which means              why it worked. How has the treatment changed today?
that they can become many different types of cells in the
                                                                 2. Depending on their source, stem cells may be referred
human body. Until very recently, it was thought that
                                                                    to as totipotent, pluripotent, and multipotent. What
adult stem cells could only give rise to the different types
                                                                    are the differences among these types of stem cells,
of cells in the tissues where they were found. For example,
                                                                    and where are they found in the body?
basic blood stem cells found in bone marrow could
become red blood cells, white blood cells, and so on.            3. Some people (including some scientists) consider
However, recent research has shown that many adult                  stem cell research and use objectionable. What is the
stem cells can be made to develop into a wider range of             foundation of the controversies surrounding stem
specialized cells. For instance, in the laboratory, blood           cells? What steps has Canada taken to restrict the
stem cells have yielded muscle cells, including heart               ways in which stem cell research can be performed?
muscle cells, and nerve cells. This is an exciting area of



                                                                                Chapter 15 Human Development • MHR        527
