aa

it's unlikely that Shakespeare ever visited Venice, but he wa
sufficiently fascinated by its myths and history to set two of
greatest plays there, The Merchant of Venice and Othello. The Venetian
Republic was renowned in Shakespeare's day for its political
independence, its relaxed seaial morals and love of pleasure, its

Shakespeare could have learned a greai deal about Venice and its
Jewish community from ‘ravelers and published travel accounts
One of the earliest is that-of William Thomas, The History of Italy
(London, 1549), who describes Jewish usury—taking interest
at fifteen percent—a rate that enriches both the authorities and

the Jews:

It is almost incredible what gain the Venetians receive by the usury of
the Jaws, both privately and in common. For in every city the Jews keep
open shops of usury, taking gages of ordinary for fifteen in the hundred
by the year, and if at the year’s end the gage be not redeemed itis
forefeer, or at the least done away to a great disadvantage, by reason
whereof the Jews are out of measure wealthy in those parts.

Another early visitor was Laurence Aldersey, whose “Account of
Venice” provides insight into the customs of the Jews. It was written
in i581 and printed in Richard Hakluyt’s Principal Navigations,
Voyages, Traffiques, and Discoveries of ihe English Nation (3 volumes,
London 1598-1600).

The number of Jews is there thought to be 1,000, who dwell in a certain
place of the city and have also a place to which they resort to pray, which
is called the Jews’ Synagogue. They all and their offspring use to wear
ved caps (for so they are commanded) because there they may be known
from other men. For my further knowledge of these people, I-went into
their synagogue upon a Satvrday, which is their Sabbath day, and I
found them in their service or prayers, very devout. They receive the
Five Books of Moses and honor them by carrying them about their
church, as the papists do their cross, Their synagogue is in form round
and the people sit around it, and in the midst there is a place for him

that reads to the

As for their apparel, all of them wear a large
white laum over their garments which reaches. fiom their head down to
ihe ground. The psalms they sing os we do, having no image nor using

any manner of idolatry. Their error is that they believe not in Christ,

nor yet receive the New Testament.

An.even more vivid co:

account of Venetian Jewry is
offered by Thomas Coryate, in his travel narrative Coryat’s Crudities
(London, 1611):

Iwas at a place where the whole fraternity of the Jews dwelleth together,
which ts called the ghetto, being an island: for it is enclosed round about
with water, Ir is thought there are of tiem in all betwixt five and six
thousand. They are distinguished and discerned froin the Chvistians by
the habits on their heads; for some of them do weay hats and those red.

. They have divers synagogues in their ghetto, at the least seven,
where all of them, both men, women; and children, do meet together
upon their Sabbath, which is Saturday, to the end to do their devotion
and to serve God in their kind ....

In the room where they celebrate their divine service, no women sit but
have, a loft or gallery. proper to themselves only, ushere I saw many
Jewish women, uthereof some were as beautiful as I ever saw, and so
gorgeous in their apparel, jewels, and chains of gold, and rings adorned
with precious stones, that some of our English. countesses. do scarce
exceed them ... They are very religious in two things orily, and no more,
in that they worship no images, and that they keep their Sabbath so
sirictly that upon that day they will neither buy nor sell, nor do any
secular, profane, or irreligious exercise (I would to God our Christians
would imitate the Jews herein), no, not so much as dress their victuals,
which is.always done the day before, but dedicate themselves to the
strict worship of God..

Truly, it is a most lamentable case for a Christian to consider the
damnable estate of these miserable Jews, in that they reject the true
Messiah and Savior of their souls, hoping to be saved rather. by the
observation of these Mosaical ceremonies (the date whereof was fully
expired at Christ's incarnation) than by the merits of the Savior of the
world, without whomt all mankind. shell perish. And as pitiful as it is
to see that few of them living in ‘Italy are converted to the Christian
religion. Por this I understand is the main. iripediment

to their conversion. All their goods are confiscated as

soon as they embrace Christianity.

ecange of their centre] role in economic exchange—in foreign
trade, loans to the state, and small-scale moneylending—Jews
were seen in late medieval and early modem Europe as a necessary
evil; they could neither be tolerated nor expelled. Jews had been
lending money to Venice to fight its wars since the late fourteenth
century. Venetian authorities, like others in Europe, felt uneasy
about the close cohabitation of Christians and Jews, so they passed
laws forbidding sexual relations between them.

The origins of the Venetian Ghetto can be traced back to the Fourth
Lateran Council of 1215, when Pope Innocent [II decreed that Jews
should be forbidden from holding public office, should have
clothing that distinguished them from Christians, and should not
appear in public during Raster week. It was the responsibility of
Christian magistrates to restrict Jewish economic activity.
Segregation was seen’ as a simple way of enforcing these laws in
Venice and elsewhere (Jews had been living in restricted quarters in
cities like Prague since the late thirteenth centuiy). Jews had been.
pennitted to live in Venice in 1509, and soon secured the right to
practice money-lending in return for financial payments to the state.
They were tolerated as a source of revenue for the government and
as providers of cheap Credit for poor Christians. Unlike what we find
in Shakespeare’s play, Venetian Jews were forbidden to make large-
scale commercial loans. : : . :

In 1516, after rejecting the idea of relegating the Jews to a small
island called Giudecca, the Venetian authorities designated an area
called the ghétto nuovo, or. "new foundry," named after the copper

and bronze foundry there, as the locale where all Jews were required
io relocate and to tive in rented quarters. This is the origin of the
now widespread use of the term "ghetto." High walis sealed o
access and heavy wooden gates, guarded by Christians, were opened
at sunrise and locked at sunset. At its peak, several thousand Jews
lived inthe Ghetto and a thriving community flourished.

Anti-Jewish’ actions intensified in the sixteenth-century Catholic
Europe, part of a larger Counter-Reformation reaction by the -
Church. Copies of the Talmud were bumed in 1553 and Jews wha
had converted to Christianity, and whose conversion was suspect,
were persecuted. In 1555 Pope Paul IV declared, “Jews were
condemmed to live in a quarter set apert fromm the Chuistians." They
also had to wear distinctive garb and were no longer allowed to own
real estate. The Venetian Ghetto served as a model for other Italian
cities. In the wake of Pope Paul IV's decree, similar restrictions were
imposed on Jewish communities in Rome, Siena, Florence, Verona,
Padua, and elsewhere in Italy.

Not until 1797, two hundred and eighty years after they had first
swung shut on the Jews within, would the wooden gates of the’
Venetian ghetto be torn down and burned. The gateless Ghetto
still ‘stands, a living memorial to the story of Jews in early
modern, Europe.

usance here with us in Venice" (1.3.34-35). Shylock knows thai he
is hated in turn by Antonio and other Christians because he makes
an ample living through the practice of usuzy. He says of Antonio,

He hates our sacred nation, and he rails,

Bven there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls interest,

Cursed be muy tribe

TFT forgive him! (1,3.38-42)

Antonio says, "I oft delivered from his forfeitures / Many that have
at times made moan to me" (3.3.22-23), Antonio's refusal to take
interest from borrowers is seen in the ‘context of the play as
Christian generosity, while Shylock is positioned as a bloodthirsty
fiend. However, Christian usury had become business as usual by
the time the play was written.

Debates over usury in late medieval and early modern Europe
coincided with, and.were prompted by, the tise of the banking
industry, the discovery of the new world and the growth of overseas
markets and trade, all-of which depended on money lent at interest.
For without loans at interest, wade and exploration were badly
impeded. There was general agreement that usury was both wrong
and necessary, and had to be regulated. ‘The debates turned on a
number of complex questions: Was all money-lending at interest
forbidden, as St. Thomas Aquinas had argued, or was it only wrong
to lend at exorbitant rates? Did usury depend upon intent? Did it

depend upon it permissible io ¢ st te the rich,

though not to the po

Shakespeare's play was written in the midst of debates in England
over usury, and the period witnessed a number of important
pamphlets on this subject, such as The Death of Usury (London,
1594) and Money Monger, Or the Usurers Almanacke (London, 1626)
After the Act Against Usury passed in 1571, lending at ten percent
interest was iolerated and by 1624, the House of Cammons stmack
out of the usury staurte the words "that all usury was against the law
of God.”

Jewish usury wes also likened to prostitution, another distasteful,
illicit, but seemingly necessary social evil: Samuel Purchas, in Purchas
His Pilgrimage (London, 1617}, writes that the "beastly wade of
courtesans and cruel trade of Jews is suffered for gain" in Italy; both
"suck from the meanest to be squeezed by the greatest. .. . So well is
the rule of Paul observed ... not to be a lover of filthy lucre, from
Slthy stews, from filthy Jews," Por Jews, however, usuity was freely
permitted on loans to non-Jews (see Deuteronomy below).

The topic of usury was not merely an academic one for Shakespeare;
his own father was charged and fined forlending money at excessive
interest—charging twenty pounds interest on loans of eighty and
a hundred pounds—and he was fined forty shillings in one of
these cases.

The readings that follow offer the much-debated positions in the
Bible, which are followed by the pros and cons of usury as set out by
Francis Bacon in his Essays.

If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shalt not be as an usurer unto him:

ye shall not oppress him with usury.

LEVITICUS 25:35-37

Moreover, if thy brother be impoverished and fallen into decay with thee,

thou shalt relieve him and as a stranger and a sojoumer, so shall he live with thee .
Thou shalt take no usury of him nor, vantage, but thou shalt fear thy god, that thy brother may live with thee.
Thou shalt not give him thy money to usury, nor lend him thy vituals for increase.

DEUTERONOMY 23:19-20

Thou shalt not give to usury to thy brother, as usury of money, usury of meat, usury of anything that is put to usury.
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury, but thou shalt not lend upon usury unto thy brother, that the Lord God
may bless thee in all that thou setteth thine hand to; in the land whither thou goest to possess it.

LUKE 6:30-31

Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods, ask them not again.
And as ye would that men should do to you, so do ye to them likewise.

{all quotations are from the Geneva Bible (London, 1560)}

vakespeare combined two sources
in. creating The Merchant of Venice,
one for the flésh-bond story, the other
for the caskets scenes. The story of the
pound of flesh most immediately
derives from Giovanni Fiorentino’s
collection Il Pecorone [The Simplezon},
published in Italy in 1558. Many ofits
plot elements are familiar to those who
know Shakespeare's story, A young
Venetian man pursues a mysterious,
intelligent, and beautiful woman in
Belmonte, who has offered herself and
her possessions to the first man who can
“possess” her. The young man,
Giannetto, has been adopted by
‘ Ansaldo, a rich man who
gives him the wealth and ship
he needs to make his swt to
the lady. He sails to the island
and is feasted by the lady, who
then invites him to take a
drink before going to bed
with ber The ‘drink is
dragged, and he falls asleep
immediately. On his second
attempt events. follow the
same pattern. Giannetto
returns to Ansaldo, who has
now invested much of his
wealth in Giannetto’s suits,
and for the third ty Ansaldo
borrows the money from a
Jewish money-lender. Giannetto goes to
the island and succeeds the third time
(with help from the lady's servant), but
forgets to repay Ansaldo’s bond on time.
The benefactor now owes the Jew a pound
of flesh. The heroine, dressed as a lawyer,
saves the day, triumphing over the Jew by
pointing out that in cutting that pound he
is forbidden to shed a drop of blood. The
lawyer also persuades. Giannetto to give
her a ring his lady had given him, and the
lady presents him with the ring when he
returns to Belmonte. -Ansaldo returns to”
Belmonte with Giannetto, and marries the
lady's servant, who had appeared in the
courtroom | disguised. as . the
lawyer's clerk. ‘The flesn-bond
story at the heart of this tale is an
old ome and was found in a
variety of contemporary versions,
including Alexander Silvayn's The &
Orator—-"Of a Jew, who would for
his debt have a pound of the flesh
of a Christian"--which had just
been translated into English.

ee

In JI Pecorone the heroine could
only be won by’a-maa who
succeeded in spending a night
with hes, but she used rugged
wine to fend off all wooers,

including the hero (anti, on
his third attempt, he wae
warmed not to drink th
wine). Shakespeare. rejected
this bed trick, with its roots
in the story of Odysseus
and Circe, in favor of the
more complex casket story,
which he adapted from
Richard Robinson’s English
translation of the Cesta
Romanorum. In this source it
is a princess who successfully
chooses between the gold,
silver, and lead caskets
in order to marry an
emperor's son.

The two strands of the plot have deep
anthropological and psychological
dimensions, which lend a good deal of
complexity to the play. Sigmund Freud
seized upon the casket scenes as an
example of the symbolic overcoming of
death and the death wish: "In this way,"
Freud writes, “man overcomes death,
which he has recognized intellectually.
No greate: triumph of wish-fulfillment
is conceivable" (The Standard Edition of
the Complete Psychological Works of
Sigmund Freud, trans. James Strachev
(London,.1958), vol.12, pp. 291-301,

And others have seen in
the threatened cut of a
pound of a Christian's
flesh a threat = of
drcumdsion or castration—
underscored by the Jew's
lines in Silyayn’s | The
Orator about cutting the
Christian's "privy members."
(It's worth noting that not
until Act 4 do we leam that
the site of Shylock’s cut
will be from near
Antonio's heart, where, as
St. Paul writes in the New
Testament, Christians are
symbolically circumcised).

All this is to suggest that the plot

elements are ancient and richly

Tesonant, and reinforce the play's

fascination with desire, conversion,
and wish fulfiliment.
