Hi Everyone!
I had a student ask me if I had any advice in regards to study tips and good work habits knowing that they are having a hard time concentrating, focusing, and staying motivated. I am sure that they are not the only one so I wanted to share the following tips and tricks with everyone. The Biology content is challenging enough but it gets even more challenging when you throw in a fast quartered schedule and trying to stay on track while at home. So scheduling you time is huge! Here is how I would schedule myself:
I would commit a minimum of three hours during every regular school day to this course - as if I was attending in-school classes with everyone else. So 3 hours in the morning for one course and 3 hours in the afternoon if you have a second course. Bio 30 is definitely a 3 hour a day course. It's mostly because 90% of Bio is just memorization (like here's a diagram of a brain, label it for me and tell me what all the parts do - that's pure memorization!) 
I would break up that 3 hours into 20-25 minute chunks followed by a 5 minute break/reward. The key is to work for 20-25 minutes straight without distractions (in other words turn off your devices completely! Every beep or buzz will take you out of the learning zone where you want/need to be). Then reward yourself with 5-10 minutes of activities you really like to do (Snap chat, tik tok, a healthy snack, some stretches or a quick walk for fresh air). But give yourself that small reward to work towards because you deserve it after putting in 25 minutes of uninterrupted learning! Then do it again for another 20-25 minutes and so on! You'll be surprised how quick 3 hours will go by!
Chunking your work into smaller and more achievable goals will really help as well. For example, most chapters you are given 4-6 days to complete. So on day 1 look ahead and see how many sections there are. There's usually 3 or 4 per chapter. So then, set a goal of only doing a section per day. Don't go into that day with a generic goal of "trying to get as much of that chapter done as possible" cause at the end of most days you're going to feel like you barely made a dent and will feel discouraged. Small, manageable and reasonable goals for each day. 
When it comes to memorization repetition is king! There are 465 key terms in Biology 30 that you will be expected to know! Anytime you can write out a definition of a new-to-you term go for it! Make some flash cards even if you don't like to use them - the more you write the definition, the more that will stick. I have most of the periodic table memorized now - not because I wanted to - but because I've used it so often that it's just all in my head now and I couldn't forget it if I wanted to! I have also put every single key term onto the Quizlet App for you. Just search "nealmackay" and you will find my class. I love Quizlet because it puts the terms into flash cards or multiple choice quizzes and even a matching game! This way you can study your terms whenever and wherever you are! 
When it comes to diagrams, instead of just looking at pretty drawings in the text, try drawing it freehand in your notes at least once - it doesn't have to be pretty, you can even simplify it into something that makes more sense to you. You'll know your absolutely ready for any question I could ask on test if you can close your book and see the image you drew in your head and be able to reproduce it without double checking anything.
My Daily approach to Biology would be something like this:
Day 1
Sit down and read the entire first section of the chapter like a novel. Don't stop and take notes just read the whole thing from start to finish. This will help you to get the big picture and have a better understanding of what is being presented and what parts are more important than others.
THEN go back and slowly go through making notes and writing out key terms - looking up any term you don't understand.
Then I would go and watch a video on that topic (best Youtube channels are Khan Academy and Crash Course).
Then after watching the video I would read the section from start to finish again and then add any notes or clarification I got from the video and second reading.
Lastly, try any practice questions in that section and check my answers with the key and check in with my teacher if I have any questions or concepts that I still need clarity on.
Day 2 - start by reading over my notes from Day 1 (repetition!) Then go onto the next section the same way as Day 1
Day 3 - start by reading over my notes from Day 1 and 2 (more repetition!) Then the next section the same way as Day 1
Day 4 - start by reading over my notes for all sections (even more repetition!) - now there should be a chapter review etc...
Day 5 - start by reading over my notes for all sections (repetition is king!) - Use the Unit Outcomes in the Learning Guide to dictate what I still need to work on mastering.
Day 6 - I should be ready for my first Chapter Quiz! Once I've written the quiz I would review it and see what I got wrong and how I could fix it.
Day 7 - Start the next Chapter with the same process in Day 1...
And most importantly - use all of the resources that are available to you! For all of your FORMATIVE learning you are free to access friends, family, Google (especially good videos!) and - most importantly - your teacher! Don't be shy about emails or virtual meetings - there's no question too big or too small! 
Hope that helps one or more of you!
This is the way!