

Answers to Multiple Choice Questions

1. a
2. d
3. b
4. d
5. d
6. c
7. c
8. d
9. a
10. b
11. a
12. c
13. a
14. c
15. c
16. d
17. b
18. a
19. c
20. c
21. b
22. d
23. d
24. a
25. d


Answers to Numerical Response Questions
1. 	2, 5, 4, 3
2.	6, 5, 4, 2
3	2, 1, 4, 3


Sample Answers to Written Response Questions

1.	a) The neurotransmitter most affected by Parkinson’s  is dopamine. (1 mark)



b) The neurotransmitter dopamine is critical to the way the brain controls muscle movements. In the frontal lobes, dopamine controls the flow of information from other areas of the brain. (2 marks)

c) A person with reduced levels of dopamine in the brain loses the ability to execute smooth, controlled movements. The basil nuclei integrate motor commands, ensuring that proper muscle groups are activated or inhibited. (2 marks)

d) The meninges protect the CNS by preventing the direct circulation of blood through the cells of the brain and spinal cord. The blood-brain barrier both protects the brain and supplies the brain with nutrients and oxygen. The capillary walls form a barrier that blocks many toxins and infectious agents from entering the brain while allowing other substances, such as glucose and oxygen, to pass through the barrier by special transport mechanisms. There isn’t a special transport mechanism for dopamine; therefore, it cannot cross the blood-brain barrier and does not reach the cells of the basil nuclei. (4 marks)

e) Societal Obstacles (accept any two of the following)
lack of funding for research
lack of funding for technologies
difficulty testing new treatments in humans
resistance by some groups to the use of using embryos as a source of stem cells
accept any other reasonable societal obstacle

Technological Obstacles (accept any two)
access to newly developed technologies
time required for clinical trials to determine the effectiveness and safety of new treatments
access to embryonic stem cells
any other reasonable technology obstacle
(4 marks)

/37











Bio 30 Chapter 11 Quiz KEY
BLM 11.4.1A
ANSWER KEY

DATE:	NAME:	CLASS:


PAGE  
Copyright © 2007, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a Subsidiary of the McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
This page may be reproduced for classroom use by the purchaser of this book without the written permission of the publisher.

PAGE  1
Copyright © 2007, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a subsidiary of the McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
This page may be reproduced for classroom use by the purchaser of this book without the written permission of the publisher.


DATE:	NAME:	CLASS:

PAGE  2
Copyright © 2007, McGraw-Hill Ryerson Limited, a Subsidiary of the McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
This page may be reproduced for classroom use by the purchaser of this book without the written permission of the publisher.




