Dracula
1931  movie  version starring Bela Lugosi
Before viewing
1.   List  2 facts you know about  Bela Lugosi
While  viewing
Keep in mind:  This movie was  made in  1931, 2 years after sound  was
added  to movies.
2.   Sound effects:
What  sound  effect is noticeably missing from the  movie?
List  one  sound  effect.  How does it add  to the   atmosphere/mood?
3.   Camera  angles:
List  one  camera  angle.   How does it add  to the   atmosphere/mood?
4.  Special effects:
Special effects are  any  attempts  by the  filmmaker to trick  the
audience  into  believing they  are  seeing  a real item  or  place.
Because of the  age  of the  movie, the  effects are  much  more  obvious
to us  than  they would  have  been  to the  1931  audience.
List  2  special  effects used  in the  movie.  Do you know how the
director  staged  them?   How do they add  to the  atmosphere  of the
movie?
5.  This movie is based  on the play we are  reading.   List at  least  three
ways  the  movie Dracula differs from the  Dracula in the  play.

The  enclosed  questions  are the  assignment for this  unit.
You will  be  marked  on the following  criteria:
1.    Set  Design
•    Neat, creative, colorful,  accurate
2.   Comprehensive   answers
•    Thought  and  understanding
3.  Answers written  in complete  sentences
TOTAL:   /50
Due  Date:  two  days after we finish the  play.

ENGL  10-2             DRACULA                                      MA^It;
* Answer all questions in full sentences.
ACT1
1.    Before Count Dracula even  appears on stage, the playwrights prepare the  audience for
the presence of a vampire.  How do the following events serve to  alert the viewer?
a.     Seward tells Harker that Renfield has  always been a quiet patient.  Recently,  he
has been wild  and uncontrollable.
b.   Ever  since Mina became ill,  the dogs in the village have bee nhowling  as  if  in
terror,  as though wolves were present.
c.     After each blood transfusion, Mina grew stronger,  but in the morning,  she  was
pale  again  and had two little marks  on her throat.
2.    Lucy appears with  a scarf around her neck.  What is  she  hiding?  Who else had a similar
injury?
3.    Renfield is an inmate of the sanitarium because of a strange illness.  What is it?  Why
does it make him particularly susceptible  to Dracula's  powers?
4.    Several times, a bat  appears trying to fly into a window.  What does its purpose seem to
be?

Dncuh  -  Act   2
1.    Dracula offers to hypnotize the maid to rid her  of  the pain in her head.  What is his real
purpose?
2.    Van Helsing says that  a vampire from Transylvania can't be in England.  Why not?
How   does travel by plane make Dracula's  presence possible?
3.    Van Helsing confirms his suspicions  that Dracula is a vampire with three tests.
a.    One is accomplished  with  a mirror.
b.    The second requires  a cut in Van Helsing's finger.
c.    The third test uses a handful of  wolfsbane.
^Explain the significance of each test
4.     Lucy is drawn to a newspaper story which she  reads with  dread.  What is it about?  Who
is the  mysterious, beautiful woman in the  story?
5.
Lucy  asks Harker to promise  that he will not tell her  anything he plans to do in his
struggle  against the vampire  and that he will  not allow her to kiss  him.   Why not?

Dncuh    -  Act    J
1.    A change has  taken place in Lucy.  How do her  appearance and behavior show that  she
is now more under Dracula's power?  What shows that there is still hope  for her?
2.    Van Helsing, Harker, and Seward corner Dracula and try to prevent his escape from the
library of the sanitarium.  What power do they have  over him?
3.    Final destruction of the vampire takes place when the three men track him  to his lair.
Where do they find him?  How do they dispose  of him?

English  10-2
Character Analysis  for "Dracula"
Complete  two  analyses.
(Choices:  Dr.  Seward, John  Harker, Abraham Van  Helsing,  R.  M. Renfield,  Lucy
Seward,  Count  Dracula)
Character's  Name:                                         „
1.  For each  category
•    An  example from the  beginning  of the  play WITH  a quotation  (include
page  number).
•    An  example  from the middle  or end of the  play, WITH  a quotation  (include
page  number).
Remember:  You  need  one  quotation  from the  play to  support each  of these
details.
2. What  changes  have occurred  in the  character from what they thought  at  the
beginning  to what they think  at the  end of the  play?
Personality trait (ex.  beliefs, temperament,  character traits  ...)
Background trait (ex. experiences, education, intelligence, relationships...)

English  10-2
Format for the Literary Exploration Essay
Paragraph  1 -  Introduction  (5-7  sentences)
•     Discuss  the larger idea from the prompt.
•     Make sure you have a clear thesis/topic/theme  statement.
Paragraph 2 = Discussion  of the literary text  (10-15  sentences)
•     You must prove to the marker that you know the text extremely well and
understand the topic.  Do this by providing specific examples  or quotations from
the excerpt that relate to the topic provided.
o    Know the characters'  names and how they are spelled
o    Know the author's  name
•     Remember transition words and phrases:  to begin  with,  next,  in addition  to,
moreover, for  example,  etc.
•     Remember  to have clear topic and concluding sentences.
Paragraph 3 = Discussion of a Personal Experience (10-15  sentences)
•     Relate a specific and profound personal experience that relates  to the topic
provided.
•     You must provide specific details  so that I can see  the scene.
•     Use language that enlivens the example; I want to "hear" you.
•     Remember transition words.
•     You  need  clear topic and concluding sentences.
Paragraph 4 = Conclusion  (4 -5  sentences)
•     Restate your jheme/thesis.  Use differentwordsJ^phr^mg_if you can.
•     Briefly recap what you said in the previous two paragraphs.
•     Do not introduce any new characters  or ideas in this paragraph.

English  10-2
Essay  Format  Planning  Sheet
Personal  Response to  Literature
Introduction
•     TAG  (Title, Author,  Genre)
•     Essay  topic:
•     A=  Main event/idea/character  development/theme  from the story  supporting
the  above stated  topic.
•     B=  Link to your own experience  related to  the topic.
•     Identify the  similarity  between  A and  B and their  relation to your topic.
First Body Paragraph
•     Topic  Sentence:  In the  story/novel/play
Support:  Example  1 from text.
Discuss  Example  1
This shows that
•     Support:   Example  2 from text
Discuss  Example  2
This  shows  that
•     Concluding  sentence
