 CHAPTER
 Sensory Reception
 12
Chapter Concepts
12.1 Sensory Receptors and Sensation
• Sensory reception occurs at the senses.
 Sensation and perception occur in the
 brain.
• Various sensory receptors detect
 information in the internal and
 external environments.

12.2 Photoreception
• The human eye is similar to a camera.
 It contains a lens that focusses light,
 a pupil that lets in light, and a dark
 interior that contains light receptors.
• The retina contains rods and cones.
 Rods function in dim light and produce
 black and white images. Cones function
 in bright light and produce colour
 images.

12.3 Mechanoreception
 and Chemoreception
• The outer ear and middle ear transmit
 the energy of sound waves to the inner
 ear.
• The inner ear contains mechanoreceptors
 for hearing and balance.
• Tastes are detected by chemoreceptors
 in the taste buds of the tongue. Smells
 are detected by chemoreceptors in the
 nose.
• The skin contains receptors for light
 touch, pressure, pain, heat, and cold.

 he woman meditating is trying to ignore all sights, sounds, and
 other sensory input from the outside world. It is a difficult task.
 Some people prefer the experience of relaxing inside a sensory deprivation
 tank for an hour or so. Many people find this experience relaxing for
 a short period of time—usually about an hour or so. If the brain is
 deprived of sensory information for an extended period of time, however,
 extreme anxiety, hallucinations, depression, memory loss, and
 antisocial behaviour can result. People who are in solitary confinement
 sometimes experience these effects, as do people who are confined to
 bed in hospital isolation wards. Why does sensory deprivation confuse
 the brain and upset homeostasis in the body? As you will discover in
 this chapter, the senses function together to allow the human body to
 detect and adjust to changes in the body and in the external environment.

404 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 Launch Lab
Sense It
When one or more of the senses are inhibited, the brain’s perception of the
environment can change. Identifying even familiar objects can become difficult.
In this activity, you will try to identify familiar objects while one or more of your
senses is inhibited.

Safety Precautions
• Do not bring food meant for consumption into the laboratory.
• Do not taste any sample (you will use only the senses of touch and smell
 in this exercise).
• Before the exercise begins, alert your teacher to any allergies you have.

Materials
• new earplugs • blindfold
• samples of unidentified but familiar objects supplied by your teacher

Procedure
 1. Work with a partner. One partner will be the tester, and the other partner will
 be the subject.
 2. The subject will use earplugs and a blindfold to block the senses of hearing
 and sight.
 3. The tester will acquire samples of the unknowns provided by the teacher.
 4. Now, with the subject gently pinching his or her nose shut to block the sense
 of smell, the tester will provide the first sample for the subject to hold.
 5. The subject should use the sense of touch to identify the unknown sample,
 and then the subject should use the sense of smell if the sample remains
 unknown. The tester should record how and if the subject is able to identify
 the sample.
 6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 using the other samples. Then switch roles, and repeat
 the activity with another set of samples.

Analysis
 1. Which samples were the most difficult to identify? Which samples were the
 easiest to identify?
 2. Which senses would you normally use to identify the samples?
 3. You probably found it easier to identify the samples using a number of senses,
 rather than only one. Which senses would you use to
 a) check if milk is sour
 b) remove stones from a bag of dry lentils
 c) stand on one leg without falling over
 4. Explain why integration is important for interpreting sensory information.


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 405
 SECTION
 Sensory Receptors
 12.1 and Sensation
Section Outcomes
In this section, you will
• explain the difference
 between sensory
 reception, sensation,
 and perception
• describe the process
 of sensory adaptation
• distinguish among the
 major sensory receptors
 in the human body



Key Terms
sensory receptors
sensation
perception Figure 12.1 What information would your senses detect if you were standing in this scene?
sensory adaptation How would this information help your body maintain homeostasis?
photoreceptors
chemoreceptors
mechanoreceptors Imagine yourself in the fairgrounds area of the brain that has interpreted this
thermoreceptors shown in Figure 12.1. What sensory information.
 information would your nervous system Neural impulses that begin in the
 be gathering? What would you see, hear, optic nerve are sent to the visual areas of
 and smell? What foods would you taste? the cerebral cortex, and we see objects
 How would a light breeze feel on your (Figure 12.2). Neural impulses that begin
 skin? Your senses of sight, hearing, taste, in the auditory nerve of the ear are sent
 smell, and touch keep you informed to the area of the brain that perceives
 about the world around you, and allow sound, and we hear sounds. Each
 your body to respond to your external person’s unique perception results from
 environment. Internal sensors, such as how the cerebral cortex interprets the
 those that regulate blood pH, blood meaning of the sensory information.
 pressure, and blood volume, also help
 •••
 your body maintain homeostasis.
 The senses transmit sensory 2 Compare
  sensory reception and
 sensation. Provide an example
 information, in the form of
 of each.
 electrochemical impulses, to the brain.
 Different forms of energy stimulate the
 sensory receptors—the nerve endings
 2 Each
  type of sensory receptor
 functions by initiating neural
 and cells that detect sensory information. impulses. How is the brain able
 The sensory receptors then initiate to convert sensory information
 neural impulses. Sensation occurs when into perception?
 the neural impulses arrive at the cerebral •••
 cortex. For example, your face may detect
 the warmth of a beam of sunlight. When Sensory Adaptation
 the brain receives and processes this A massive amount of sensory information,
 information, you will feel, or experience, coming from many neural pathways,
 the sensation of warmth on your cheek. bombards the brain every second.
 The resulting sensation depends on the Sometimes, the brain can filter out

406 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 Figure 12.2 A PET scan of the human brain
 showing brain activity in a volunteer at different
 stages of stimulation. The orange-red colour
 indicates that the brain is active and perception
 is taking place. In the last two columns, the visual
 area at the back of the brain is activated and the
 perception of sight is occurring. In the first column,
 the subject’s eyes are closed. Thus neural
 information is not getting from the senses to
 the brain, and there is no perception of sight.




redundant, insignificant information. perceives sensory information. Use the
This process is called sensory adaptation. illusions in Figure 12.4 on page 408 to
For example, sensory adaptation has determine the difference between the
occurred when you no longer notice the sensory information received and what
ticking of a clock or feel the clothes on your brain actually perceives.
your skin. When the senses detect a
 •••
significant change in external or internal
conditions, the body readjusts (Figure 2 Describe
  an example of sensory
 adaptation, and explain why it
12.3).
 occurs.
 In order to process sensory
information quickly, the brain parallels
or splits up this input to various areas of
 2 What
  happens during
 integration that causes people
the brain—a form of neural multi-tasking. to perceive optical illusions?
Sometimes the sensory information does •••
not get reintegrated precisely, and what
we sense is not necessarily what we Sensory Receptors
perceive. This effect can be demonstrated Sensory receptors are specialized cells BiologyFile
with optical illusions, which scientists or neuron endings that detect specific FYI
use to try to understand how the brain stimuli. Human sensory receptors can Can an octopus experience
 pain and suffering? Most
 likely, say neuroscientists,
 which is why these common
 research animals need to be
 treated humanely and given
 behavioural enrichment.
 Support for this idea has
 come from experiments
 conducted by octopus
 expert Jennifer Mather,
 professor of psychology at
 the University of Lethbridge,
 and Roland Andersen of
 the Seattle Aquarium. The
 researchers gave empty
Figure 12.3 When you wash your hands in tepid water after being outside in the cold, the water plastic pill bottles to eight
may feel very hot. In contrast, you may perceive the tepid water as chilly after holding a warm octopuses, who played with
cup of tea. You can duplicate this phenomenon by placing your right hand in a cup of warm the pill bottles. This was the
water and your left hand in a cup of cold water for 1 min. Then put both hands in room- first time play had been
temperature water. What has happened to your perception of temperature, and why? observed in invertebrates.


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 407
 A Herman’s Grid. When you B The Impossible Terrace, C Kitaoka’s Rotating Snakes. D Fraser’s Spiral. Try to
 look at the centre of the by D. MacDonald. Is down Look at these circles from follow the spiral into
 large square, the dots in up, or is up down? off centre. Do you think the centre.
 the middle should look they are actually spinning?
 white, and the dots you
 see out of the corners
 of your eye should look
 be classified into four categories: Damage to particular sensory
 black. photoreceptors, chemoreceptors, receptors such as photoreceptors can
Figure 12.4 These mechanoreceptors, and thermoreceptors result in loss of the associated sense, even
diagrams produce (Table 12.1). Each type of receptor is able if the rest of the sense organ and nervous
various optical illusions. to transduce, or convert, one form of system are fully functional. Hundreds of
 energy from a specific stimulus into thousands of Canadians have lost their
 electrochemical energy, which can be sight due to eye injuries or degenerative
 processed by the nervous system. eye disorders, such as retinitis pigmentosa
 Light energy stimulates and age-related degeneration of the
 photoreceptors. Our eyes contain photoreceptors. A newly developed
 photoreceptors, called rods and cones, artificial eye, however, offers hope to
 that absorb light and allow us to sense these people. The artificial eye includes a
 different levels of light and shades of digital video camera that is mounted on
 colour. Chemoreceptors are stimulated glasses. The camera captures images and
 by certain chemicals. The tongue contains sends them to a small computer on a
 taste buds that detect various particles in belt worn by a person who is visually
 the food we eat. The nose has olfactory impaired. The images are processed
 cells that detect odours in the air. Other and sent to several electrodes that are
 chemoreceptors detect changes in the implanted in the visual cortex, thus
 internal environment. For example, bypassing the damaged light receptors in
 chemoreceptors in the carotid arteries and the eye. The electrodes directly stimulate
BiologyFile aorta detect blood pH. Mechanoreceptors the brain, producing a pattern of bright
Web Link respond to mechanical forces from some
Retinitis pigmentosa form of pressure. For example, hair cells
includes several inherited
diseases that cause the
 in the inner ear (hearing sensors) are
photoreceptor cells (rods activated when sound waves cause parts
and cones) in the retina of the inner ear to vibrate. Other hair
to degenerate and die. Dr. cells in the inner ear (sensors for balance)
Paul Schnetkamp at the
 are stimulated when they bend, thus
University of Calgary is one
of the scientists studying providing information about body and
this disorder, which affects an head position. Proprioceptors in and near
estimated 50 000 Canadians. the muscles also provide information
What is the current state about body position, as well as movement.
of understanding and Figure 12.5 The artificial eye sends
treatment of retinitis There are various mechanoreceptors in electrical impulses that directly stimulate the
pigmentosa? the skin, which allow the body to detect visual cortex of the brain. This man became
 light touch, pressure, and even pain. blind in an accident over 20 years ago. He

 @
www.albertabiology.ca
 www Thermoreceptors in the skin detect
 heat and cold.
 can now distinguish large letters and several
 objects, and he has even driven a car around
 a parking lot.


408 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
Table 12.1 Major Sensory Receptors in the Human Body BiologyFile
 Category and type Web Link
 of receptor Examples of receptor Stimulus
 What would happen if your
 Photoreceptors optic and auditory nerves
 vision rods and cones in the eye visible light were switched? How would
 you perceive a flash of
 Chemoreceptors lightening or crash of
 thunder? Researchers at
 taste taste buds on the tongue food particles in saliva
 the University of Waterloo
 smell olfactory receptors in the nose odour molecules in Ontario, Canada, are
 studying what happens
 internal senses osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus low blood volume
 when senses blend, a
 receptors in the carotid artery and aorta blood pH condition called synesthesia.
 Visit the Web Links page to
 Mechanoreceptors find out what some people
 touch/pressure/pain receptors in the skin mechanical pressure with synesthesia experience.

 hearing
 balance
 hair cells in the inner ear
 hair cells in the inner ear
 sound waves
 fluid movement @
 www.albertabiology.ca
 www

 body position proprioceptors in the muscles and muscle contraction,
 tendons, and at the joints stretching, and movement
 Thermoreceptors
 temperature heat and cold receptors in the skin change in radiant energy


spots that the visual cortex perceives as a or perhaps to enhance vision beyond
crude image. Currently, the resolution of natural human capabilities.
this device is poor—about five pixels per
square centimetre—but it allows users Section 12.1 Summary
to distinguish objects with high contrast. • The senses are the human brain’s
Researchers predict that future connection to the outside world.
developments will improve the device • Sensation is initiated in the senses
enough to restore vision completely, through sensory reception, but
 ••• sensation and perception take place
 in the brain.
 2 Identify
  five major senses and
 their corresponding sensory
 • Everyone’s perception of the world

 is unique.
 receptors.
 • Sensory receptors convert different

 2 receptors
 List three types of internal sensory
 
 and their functions.
 forms of energy into electrochemical
 energy, which the nervous system can
 ••• interpret.

 Section 12.1 Review

 1. State the form of energy that stimulates 4. When you put on your new winter boots one morning,
 a) thermoreceptors b) photoreceptors you cannot help noticing how different they feel from
 your summer shoes. By the time you reach school,
 2. What types of sensory receptors are stimulated in however, you have forgotten about your boots. Why
 someone who is performing a complicated yoga pose? does your perception of the way your boots feel change?
 3. Crime-scene investigators are often frustrated by 5. Describe, in general terms, what happens in the nervous
 different eyewitness accounts of the same crime. With system when someone receives a large amount of
 your knowledge of sensation and perception, explain significant sensory information, such as when viewing
 how different people’s perceptions of the same sensory an optical illusion.
 information can be different.


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 409
 SECTION
 Photoreception
 12.2
Section Outcomes
In this section, you will
• describe the principal
 structures of the human
 eye and their functions
• observe the principal
 features of the
 mammalian eye and
 perform experiments that
 demonstrate the functions
 of the human eye
• describe several eye
 disorders and treatments



Key Terms
 Figure 12.6 The human sense of sight can tell us more about the world than any other sense
sclera can. How does the human eye detect the colour, contrast, depth, and three-dimensional shapes
cornea of this landscape?
choroid
iris
pupil Scientists estimate that, in sighted people fingerprints, the pattern of colour in the
adaptation (people who can see), vision supplies 80 iris is unique to each person. Thus, an
retina to 90 percent of the important sensory iris scan could potentially be used for
rods
cones
 information reaching the brain. The personal identification.
optic nerve incredible variety of colours and shapes The iris allows light to enter the
aqueous humour and the range of distance depicted in the inner eye through the pupil. As shown
glaucoma landscape shown in Figure 12.6 would be in Figure 12.8, the iris adjusts the size of
vitreous humour
 difficult to conceive of without the sense the pupil based on the light conditions—
lens
accommodation of sight. How does the human eye carry a process called adaptation. You can
cataracts out its varied functions? observe adaptation in your own eyes
astigmatism The human eye is essentially a by turning off the lights for 1 min and
myopia fluid-filled hollow ball, about 2.5 cm holding a mirror in front of your face.
hyperopia
fovea centralis in diameter. It focusses incoming light When you turn the lights back on, you
colour blindness energy on the photoreceptors of the can see your pupils shrink, which allows
blind spot retina. As shown in Figure 12.7, the eye less light to enter your eyes.
 has three layers: external, intermediate, Behind the iris, the choroid thickens
 and internal. The external layer of the eye and forms the ciliary muscle. The ciliary
 is a white, tough, and fibrous protective muscle attaches to the lens, which focusses
BiologyFile
 layer called the sclera. Light enters the images on the retina. The retina is the
Web Link eye through the cornea, the transparent internal layer of the eye. It is a thin layer of
Some Canadian companies
are using biometrics
 part of the sclera at the front of the eye. tissue that contains the photoreceptors—
technology to verify that The intermediate layer of the eye is the rods and cones. The rods are
you are who you say you called the choroid. The choroid absorbs sensitive to light intensity (level of
are. What is biometrics, stray light rays that are not detected by brightness), and the cones are sensitive
and what advantages
 the photoreceptors. As well, the choroid to different colours. The cones are
and disadvantages are
associated with it? contains blood vessels that nourish the packed most densely at the back of the
 eye. Toward the front, the choroid forms eye in an area called the fovea centralis.

 @
www.albertabiology.ca
 www
 the doughnut-shaped, coloured iris,
 which contains a central dark pupil. Like
 The rods and cones send sensory
 impulses to the brain via the optic nerve.


410 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 sclera retina
 choroid
 suspensory
 ligaments fovea centralis
 iris optic disc
 pupil (blind spot)
 iris pupil sclera lens
 cornea

 aqueous humour
 optic nerve
 ciliary muscle
 vitreous humour

 Figure 12.7 The anatomy
 If there were no fluid inside the deteriorate, due to a lack of oxygen and of the human eye
 eyeball, it would lose its shape, like an nutrients. This results in glaucoma,
 empty water balloon. The lens, which which leads to blindness if untreated.
 is attached to the ciliary muscles by The posterior chamber, which is
 suspensory ligaments, divides the eye into surrounded by the retina, contains a
 two chambers. The anterior chamber is clear, jelly-like fluid called the vitreous
 in front of the lens, and the posterior humour. The vitreous humour also helps
 chamber is behind the lens. In the anterior to maintain the shape of the eyeball, and
 chamber, a clear, watery fluid called the it supports the surrounding cells.
 aqueous humour maintains the shape The structures of the human eye,
 of the cornea and provides oxygen and and their functions, are summarized in
 nutrients for the surrounding cells, Table 12.2.
 including those of the lens and cornea.
 Table 12.2 The Principal Structures of the Human Eye and Their Functions
 A small amount of aqueous humour is
 produced every day and drained by small Structure Function
 ducts. If these ducts become plugged, External layer (Sclera)
 pressure can build up in the eye, causing sides and back of sclera protects and supports the eyeball
 the delicate blood vessels in the eye
 cornea bends light rays into the eye
 to rupture. The cells of the eye then
 Intermediate layer (Choroid)
 sides and back of choroid absorbs scattered light and contains blood vessels
 iris regulates the amount of light that enters the eye
 pupil is the opening for light to enter the inner eye
 ciliary muscles changes the shape of the lens in order to focus
 Internal layer (Retina)
 rods photoreceptors that are sensitive to dim light
 cones photoreceptors that are sensitive to different
 wavelengths of light (colour vision)
 fovea centralis contains a high density of cones, and provides
 acute vision
 Other
 lens focusses light rays onto the fovea centralis
 Figure 12.8 Light adaptation in the eye. In
 bright light, the iris constricts, which shrinks humours support the eyeball, with the pressure of the
 the pupil to let in less light. In dim light, the fluids they contain
 iris dilates, which widens the pupil and lets optic nerve transmits sensory information to the brain
 in more light.


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 411


2 3296_Chapter_12.indd 411 7/26/07 5:51:37 PM
 ••• you would find that light rays bend as

 2 your
 Draw a cross section of an eye in
 
 notebook. Identify the key
 they pass through the lens. In other
 words, the lens focusses the light in a
 structures and their functions. particular direction. The lens of the eye
 focusses incoming light in a similar way.
 2 changing
 How do the eyes adjust to
 
 light intensities?
 Eyeglasses and contact lenses make up
 for imperfections in the eyes that prevent
 Name this process. them from focussing clearly.
 2 how
 How does glaucoma occur, and
 
 can it cause blindness?
 Figure 12.9 shows what happens
 when the eye brings an image into focus.
 ••• Light rays are bent as they pass through
 the rigid cornea, flexible lens, and fluid
 Focussing humours. Notice that, compared with
 the object being viewed, the image fixed
 How do eyeglasses and contact lenses
 on the fovea centralis of the retina is
 help people see? How do the lenses in
 smaller, upside down, and reversed from
 cameras and microscopes work? If you
 left to right.
 could closely examine any artificial lens,
 Because the lens is flexible, it can
Figure 12.9 What change shape. This allows for finer focus
happens to light rays as when viewing objects, whether they are
they pass through the
cornea and lens?
 nearby or far away. As shown in Figure
 LIGHT RAYS !
 " 12.10, if an object is far away, the ciliary
 muscles relax and the suspensory
 ligaments become taut, causing the
 ! lens to flatten. If an object is nearby,
 "
 the ciliary muscles contract and the
 suspensory ligaments relax, causing the
 lens to become more rounded. Similarly,
 a nondigital camera focusses by changing
 the distance between the lens and the film.
POINT FLATTENED LENS The ability of the lens to change shape
OF FOCUS in order to focus images clearly on the
 retina is a reflex called accommodation.
 If you read your textbook up close for
 an extended period of time, the ongoing
 contraction of your ciliary muscles will
 ! likely cause muscle fatigue, which you
 CILIARY MUSCLE
 will experience as eyestrain.

 ROUNDED LENS BENDS Conditions Affecting
POINT LIGHT AT A WIDE ANGLE
OF FOCUS the Cornea and Lens
 As the lens ages, its protein structure can
 start to degenerate, making it opaque
 and preventing light from passing
 through it. This condition can cause
 " grey-white spots, called cataracts, on the
 CILIARY
 MUSCLE lens. To prevent cataracts from impairing
 vision, the lens can sometimes be
Figure 12.10 Accommodation. (A) What happens to the shape of the lens
when the eye is focussed on a distant object? (B) What happens when the
 surgically replaced.
eye is focussed on a nearby object? Note that the ability of the lens to bend Inherited conditions that affect
light is exaggerated in this diagram. In reality, the cornea also bends light. the eye’s ability to focus light directly


412 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 Light rays from far object




 C A test for astigmatism. If any of the
 dark lines in the diagram seem
 A The off-centre bending of light B Unevenly ground glasses or contact darker than the others, you could
 rays by an uneven cornea lenses can correct for astigmatism have an asymmetrical cornea
 Figure 12.11 Astigmatism
on the fovea centralis are common. nearsighted people can wear concave and how it can be corrected
Astigmatism, for example, is due to an lenses, which diverge incoming light
uneven curvature of part of the cornea. rays so that the image falls directly on
Because the cornea is asymmetrical, it the retina. An alternative to wearing
cannot bend light rays so that they meet corrective lenses is corrective laser surgery.
at the correct focal point (Figure 12.11). In this procedure, an ophthalmologist
As a result, vision is blurred. (eye doctor) uses a laser to cut and
 When young, most people can clearly reshape the cornea so that it will focus
see a size 20 letter on an eye chart from a light onto the retina.
distance of 20 feet (about 6.1 m). This is Another common condition is
referred to as 20/20 vision. People who hyperopia. People with this condition
have no difficulty seeing close objects but are farsighted, which means they can see
 Figure 12.12 (A) Image
cannot see a size 20 letter from 20 feet are clearly from 20 feet, but cannot focus on seen by someone who is
nearsighted. They have a condition called nearby objects because the eyeball is too nearsighted. Which object
myopia. As shown in Figure 12.12, short. The light rays do not meet before is most in focus?
the eyeball of people with myopia is they reach the retina, so the image is (B) Myopia. Where does
 the image fall in the eye?
elongated, so the focussed light falls focussed behind the retina. Convex lenses (C) Image seen by
in front of the retina instead of on the can correct hyperopia by bending light someone who is farsighted.
photoreceptors. To see distant objects, rays at a sharper angle. (D) Hyperopia. Where does
 the image fall?

 A B




 ,IGHT FROM
 NORMAL
 FAR OBJECT
 EYEBALL
 ,ONG EYEBALL RAYS FOCUS IN FRONT OF THE #ONCAVE LENS ALLOWS SUBJECT
 RETINA WHEN VIEWING DISTANT OBJECTS TO SEE DISTANT OBJECTS



 C D




 ,IGHT FROM
 NEAR OBJECT
 NORMAL
 EYEBALL

 3HORT EYEBALL RAYS FOCUS BEHIND THE #ONVEX LENS ALLOWS SUBJECT
 RETINA WHEN VIEWING CLOSE OBJECTS TO SEE CLOSE OBJECTS


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 413
BiologyFile •••
FYI
There are about 150 000
 2 cornea
 Describe the functions of the
 
 and lens of the eye.
cones per square millimetre
in the fovea centralis of
the human retina. In some
 2 myopia,
 What causes astigmatism,
 
 and hyperopia?
predatory birds, however,
the fovea centralis has over
1 000 000 cones per square
 2 accommodation.
 Compare adaptation with
 
 Give an
millimeter. Thus, a falcon can example of each.
see a mouse that is 10 cm
long from 1.5 km away. The
 •••
image stays sharp even
when the bird dives at The Photoreceptors:
over 160 km/h. The Rods and Cones
 Figure 12.14 Check your colour vision by
 Vision begins as light is focussed on the studying this colour blindness chart. Can
 light-receiving cells, or photoreceptors. you see the number 8?
 The human retina contains about 125
 million rods and 6 million cones, which 12.13) at the back and centre of the
 account for at least 70 percent of all retina. You may have noticed that your
 sensory receptors in the human body. peripheral vision lacks colour. This is
 The rods are extremely sensitive due to the central location of the fovea
 to light. In fact, a rod can be stimulated centralis. The cones require relatively
 by a single photon of light. The rods intense light to stimulate them. Thus, the
 do not enable us to distinguish colours, structures of the eye must focus light onto
 however, just degrees of black and white. the fovea centralis in order to produce a
 This is why it is difficult to detect any sharp image. In daylight, you can see best
 colours in a dark room, although you (your eyes produce the sharpest image)
 may be able to see the shapes of the if you look at an object straight on. In
 furniture. Rods also detect motion and addition to allowing us to see “in colour,”
Figure 12.13 An electron are responsible for peripheral vision. the cones allow us to perform high-
micrograph of the fovea In the human eye, the rods are spread acuity tasks, such as reading.
centralis. The fovea
centralis has been called throughout the retina, but are more There are three types of cones, and
“the most valuable square concentrated in the outside edges. each type absorbs a different wavelength
millimetre in the human The cones are the colour-detecting of light. The combination of cones
body.” This part of the eye sensors of the eye. They are packed most that can detect red, blue, and green
is densely packed with
 densely at the fovea centralis (see Figure wavelengths of light allows us to see a
cones, which detect colours.
 range of colours. Colour blindness is
 an inherited condition that occurs more
 frequently in males than in females. (You
 will discover why in Unit 7.) Colour
 blindness is actually colour deficiency,
 because it is caused by a lack or
 deficiency in particular cones, usually
 red and green cones. Thus, a red-green
 colour-blind person may find it difficult
 or impossible to distinguish between
 these colours. If you have a full range of
 colour vision, you should be able to see
 a number 8 in Figure 12.14. If you have
 red-green colour blindness, due to a lack
 of red cones, you will see a number 3.
Magnification: 26.4 ×



414 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 How do the photoreceptors relay MEMBRANOUS MEMBRANOUS
visual information to the brain? Figure DISCS CONTAINING DISCS
 PHOTOPSIN CONTAINING
12.15 shows the structure of the rods
 RHODOPSIN
and cones. The rods contain a light-
absorbing pigment called rhodopsin,
which is composed of retinal (a vitamin OUTER
 SEGMENT
A derivative) and the protein opsin. In
the dark, the rods release an inhibitory
neurotransmitter that inhibits nearby ION CHANNELS
nerve cells. When the rods absorb light, IN PLASMA
however, the rhodopsin splits into retinal MEMBRANE
and opsin. This triggers a chain reaction
that stops the release of the inhibitory
neurotransmitter, thus allowing CELL
transmission of a neural impulse to the BODY
 INNER
optic nerve. A similar process occurs in SEGMENT
the cones except the pigment is photopsin,
which reacts only to certain wavelengths
of light.  øM NUCLEUS
 Figure 12.16 shows the three main SYNAPTIC VESICLES SYNAPTIC
layers of neurons in the retina. The layer ENDINGS
 CONE CELL ROD CELL
that is closest to the choroid contains the
rods and cones, which synapse with the Figure 12.15 The rods
 are in the layer closest to the vitreous and cones of the retina.
bipolar cells in the middle layer. When humour. The axons of the ganglion cells When light strikes the
light stimulates the rods and cones, form the optic nerve. Optic nerve fibres cells, molecules in the
they stop releasing an inhibitory that emerge from the back of the eye membranous discs change
neurotransmitter into the synapse. shape. This triggers a
 transmit visual images to the occipetal cascade of reactions, which
The bipolar cells then transfer a neural lobe of the brain. allow a nerve impulse to
impulse to the ganglion cells, which be sent to the optic nerve.


RETINA OPTIC NERVE
 A B
 GANGLION
 CELL LAYER
 BLIND SPOT

 LIGHT
 BIPOLAR
 AXONS OF CELL LAYER
 GANGLION CELLS

 LIGHT
 ROD CELL
 TO OPTIC NERVE AND CONE
 ROD CELL CELL LAYER
 GANGLION CONE CELL
 CELL LAYER BIPOLAR
 CELL LAYER PIGMENTED
 ROD CELL AND LAYER OF RETINA
 CONE CELL LAYER PIGMENTED LAYER OF RETINA CHOROID
Figure 12.16 (A) The organization of the principal cells of the retina. Once stimulated, the rods
and cones permit a neural impulse to pass through the bipolar cells to the ganglion cells, which
form the optic nerve. (B) A light micrograph of the layers of the retina. The outer layer of the
retina, called the pigmented layer, does not contain rods or cones. The pigmented layer stores
vitamin A and prevents light from scattering in the eye.


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 415
 Visual Interpretation
 Figure 12.16 on the previous page shows
 where the ganglion cells merge to form
 the optic nerve. This area, called the blind
Figure 12.17 Can you detect your blind spot? Hold the textbook about spot, does not contain photoreceptors
30 cm from your eyes. Close your right eye and look at the black cross with
your left eye. Slowly move your left eye toward this figure. The dot on the
 and is therefore incapable of detecting
left will disappear when its image falls on the blind spot in your left eye. light. Use the illustration in Figure 12.17
 to find the blind spot in each of your
 ••• eyes. Usually you do not notice your
 2 functions
 Compare the locations and
 
 of the two
 blind spots because each eye
 compensates for the visual information
 photoreceptors found in the eye. that the other eye misses.
 Before the brain can integrate visual
 2 green
 What is the direct cause of red-
 
 colour blindness?
 information from both eyes, however,
 the retina must send information to the
 2 from
 How does visual information get
 
 the retina to the brain? List
 optic nerve. From there, the information
 travels to the thalamus and then to the
 the main steps in this process. occipital lobe of the cerebral cortex for
 ••• interpretation (Figure 12.18). The image
 is split in the occipital lobe because the
OCCIPITAL LOBE OCCIPITAL LOBE left optic tract carries information about
OF CEREBRUM OF CEREBRUM the right portion of the visual field, and
VISUAL CORTEX VISUAL CORTEX the right optic tract carries information
 about the left visual field. The eyes look
LATERAL GENICULATE LATERAL GENICULATE at an object from different positions, so
NUCLEUS NUCLEUS each neuron carries a slightly different
 view of the information to the brain. In
 the cerebrum, the various pieces of visual
 information are processed and integrated,
 BRAIN STEM and the image is perceived right-side up.
 Because humans (and other primates)
OPTIC TRACT OPTIC TRACT have forward-facing eyes, we have what
 is called binocular vision. This means we
OPTIC CHIASM
 use both eyes to look at and collect visual
 information about an object. This
OPTIC NERVE OPTIC NERVE
 enables the brain to perceive depth
 and three-dimensional images.
RETINA RETINA
 The various aspects of sight, such
LENS LENS as movement, colour, depth, and shape,
 appear to be handled simultaneously by
LEFT EYE RIGHT EYE different areas of the occipital lobe. This
 speeds up processing, which is important
 because the brain must constantly receive
 visual information in order to see.
 •••
 2 What is the blind spot in the eye?
 


Figure 12.18 The neural pathway of the optic nerve from the retina to the 2 What
  aspects of vision are
 integrated in the human brain
occipital lobe. Data from the right half of each retina go to the right side of
the occipital lobe, and data from the left half of each retina go to the left side so that we can see?
of the occipital lobe. Integration of the image occurs in the brain. •••

416 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 INVESTIGATION 12.A Target Skills
 Observing and describing the major
 structures of the mammalian eye

Dissection of an Eye
 on the eye; apply light slicing cuts until you penetrate
The human eye and cow eye are very similar in structure the eye.
and function. In this investigation, you will examine 4. Use the diagrams and Figures 12.7 and 12.16, to help
diagrams of a dissected cow eye and dissect a real cow eye you identify the structures of the eye. Examine the
to gain a better understanding of how the structures of posterior (rear) chamber of the eye. Notice the clear,
the eye relate to their functions. As an alternative to doing jelly-like vitreous humour, which fills this chamber.
the dissection, you can use only the diagrams or examine Identify the tough, white sclera (external layer), the
an online dissection of a mammalian eye. black choroid (intermediate layer), and the thin
 retina (internal layer). Follow the converging blood
Question
 vessels to locate the area where the retina is attached
How do the structures of a cow eye relate to their
 to the back of the eyeball at the blind spot. Identify
functions?
 the fovea centralis in the middle of the retina.
 5. Examine the anterior (front) chamber of the eye.
Safety Precautions Identify the large, central lens, as well as the ciliary
• Handle sharp instruments with care. muscle and suspensory ligaments attached to it. The
 aqueous humour is the fluid in the anterior chamber.
• Wash your hands well when you are finished.
 Identify the iris and the pupil. Identify the cornea.
• Disinfect the dissection equipment and area with

 10 percent bleach solution when you have finished. 6. If the lens is not too cloudy, hold it over some typed
 letters on a scrap piece of paper. What do you observe?
Materials
 7. Dispose of the cow eye and clean your dissecting tray
• preserved cow eye • apron
 and work area as instructed by your teacher.
• paper towel • dissecting tray
 Analysis
• safety goggles • dissecting kit
 1. Sketch and label the structures of the eye.
• 10 percent bleach solution
 2. Create a two-column table in your notebook. Use
Procedure the following headings: Eye structure, Eye function.
 1. Put on safety goggles, gloves, and an apron. Rinse Record the structures you labelled in your diagram
 off the cow eye, and place it on the dissecting tray. and their functions.
 2. Examine and locate the fat, muscles, and optic nerve 3. On your diagram, indicate where you would find the
 on the back of the eye. rods and cones. What is the function of each structure?
 3. Remove as much of the outer fat as possible. Then use Conclusion
 the scalpel to cut the eye in half. Cut in a circle, about
 4. Summarize how the structures of the eye direct light
 halfway between the cornea and the optic nerve, as
 onto the fovea centralis.
 shown in the diagram. Do not put too much pressure


 OPTIC NERVE CILIARY MUSCLE RETINA



 RETINA CHOROID BLIND SPOT
 LENS
 VITREOUS
 HUMOUR




 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 417
 Preventing Vision Loss Cigarette smoking, obesity, and exposure
 You have already read about two of the to sunlight are other factors implicated
 most frequent causes of vision loss: in the condition. There is no cure.
 glaucoma and cataracts. The leading However, behaviours that reduce the
 cause of vision loss involves disorders of risk of developing the condition and
 the retina. There are different kinds of preventing further vision loss include
 retinal disorders. In diabetic retinopathy, exercise, not smoking, and a diet rich
 for example, capillaries to the retina in green leafy vegetables and fish.
 burst, spilling blood into the vitreous
 fluid between the lens and the retina. Section 12.2 Summary
 • The cornea, lens, and humours focus
 Careful regulation of blood glucose levels
 can help guard against this disorder. light on the retina.
 • The lens is flexible. Its ability to change
 Changes in the consistency of the
 vitreous fluid may also cause retinal shape in order to focus on near or far
 detachment—a condition in which the objects is called accommodation.
 • The ability to focus is impaired if the
 retina becomes separated from the choroid
 vessels that supply it with nutrients and cornea is uneven (causes astigmatism),
 oxygen. These changes may be brought on or if the eyeball is too long (myopia) or
 by an inflammatory disorder, advanced too short (hyperopia).
 • Each eye has a blind spot, where the
 diabetes, or an injury or trauma to the
 eye. Retinal detachment is a medical optic nerve connects to the eyeball,
 emergency, because it can cause permanent but each eye compensates for what the
 vision loss. If detected early, the other cannot see. Binocular vision also
 condition may be corrected surgically. allows us to see in three dimensions.
 • The retina contains the photoreceptor
 Macular degeneration occurs when
 the cones are destroyed due to thickened cells. The rods function in dim light
 choroid vessels that no longer function and produce black and white images.
 as they should. The result is a blurring The cones function in bright light and
 of, or the development of, a blind spot produce colour images.
 • Once stimulated, the rods and cones
 in central vision. A principal factor in
 developing macular degeneration is age. send a neural message to the occipital
 The condition is the main cause of severe lobe of the brain, which processes and
 loss of vision in people of age 60 or older. integrates the information, and then
 perceives it as an image.

 Section 12.2 Review

 1. The sclera, choroid, and retina are the three main layers people often need bifocals (a combination of convex
 of the eye. Identify the structures associated with each. and concave lenses) to correct their vision?
 2. Suppose that someone you think you recognize is 6. Use word processing software to make a three-column
 walking toward you. Explain what happens to the table. List the following eye conditions in the
 lenses of your eyes as this person approaches. What first column: glaucoma, cataract, astigmatism,
 is this reflex called? nearsightedness (myopia), farsightedness (hyperopia),
 macular degeneration. In the other two columns,
 3. How do the structures of the eye focus light on the
 describe the specific problem that causes each condition
 retina? What happens if the light is focussed behind
 and the method of treatment. ICT
 or in front of the retina?
 7. A significant portion of the human brain is devoted to
 4. Can a person who has a functioning optic nerve still
 processing visual information. What does this suggest
 be blind? Explain your answer.
 about how humans are adapted to perceive their
 5. As people age, the lenses become less elastic. How would surroundings?
 this affect the accommodation reflex? Why might older


418 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 SECTION
 Mechanoreception
 12.3 and Chemoreception
Section Outcomes
In this section, you will
• describe how the
 structures of the human
 ear support the functions
 of hearing and balance
• explain how humans
 sense their environment
 through taste, smell, and
 touch
• design and plan
 experiments that
 demonstrate the
 structures and sensory
 functions of the human
 ear, nose, tongue, and skin
• explain how small doses
 of neurotoxins can be
 used as painkillers Figure 12.19 These blind Paralympic athletes are playing goalball, a sport developed in the
 1940s specifically for people who are blind or vision-impaired.


Key Terms Many animals exhibit senses that are balance, which allows us to move, sit, and
 beyond human capabilities. Elephants stand without falling. The specialized
sound waves can hear sounds that are too low for sensory receptor cells for both hearing
outer ear
pinna
 us to detect, penguins can see into the and balance are mechanoreceptors.
auditory canal ultraviolet range, and many snakes have
middle ear sensors for infrared energy. Birds, whales, Capturing Sound
tympanum and insects migrate thousands of Sound causes particles around the source
ossicles
 kilometres using a sense of navigation to vibrate and move. The auditory
oval window
Eustachian tube that humans have yet to understand. system (sense of hearing) detects these
inner ear Nevertheless, human senses go well movements as small fluctuations in air
cochlea beyond vision (Figure 12.19). They pressure, called sound waves. You can
organ of Corti include the senses of hearing, taste, visualize sound waves as ripples, like the
basilar membrane
hair cells touch, and smell, as well as internal ripples of water that move out from a
tectorial membrane senses, such as the sense of balance. stone when it is thrown into a pond. At
semicircular canals This section explores the structures room temperature in air, sound travels at
rotational equilibrium and functions of these vital senses. about 1217 km/h. Mechanoreceptors in
gravitational equilibrium
 the inner ear convert the energy of sound
utricle
saccule Hearing and Balance waves into the electrochemical energy
otoliths Humans spend considerable time that the brain perceives as sound.
proprioceptors talking and listening, and so, when we Three major divisions of the ear—
taste buds the outer ear, middle ear, and inner ear—
 communicate, hearing is often our most
olfactory cells
olfactory bulb important sense. Our hearing can also collect and direct auditory information
 warn us of danger. When listening to a to the hearing receptors (Figure 12.20 on
 favourite tune, it can trigger a strong page 420). The outer ear consists of the
 emotional response. In addition, sense pinna and auditory canal. The pinna is
 receptors in the muscles and ears provide the outside flap of the ear. It is made of
 constant information about the body’s skin and cartilage, shaped in a way that
 orientation in space. This sensory input enhances sound vibrations and focusses
 gives us our sixth sense—our sense of them into the ear. The auditory canal


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 419
BiologyFile is a tube, 2.5 cm long, that leads to the strength of the vibrations is amplified as
 eardrum in the middle ear. The auditory they pass from the malleus (hammer),
Web Link
Visit an on-line simulation
 canal amplifies sound waves, effectively to the incus (anvil), and finally to the
that shows how the inner making sounds louder. Hairs, as well as stapes (stirrup). The stapes concentrates
ear detects different earwax secreted by glands in the auditory vibrations into the membrane-covered
frequencies of sound. canal, prevent dust, insects, bacteria, and opening in the wall of the inner ear,
Describe what happens in
 other foreign materials from proceeding called the oval window. The middle ear
the basilar membrane when
you listen to a series of deeper into the ear. This is one reason can significantly amplify and concentrate
ascending notes played why physicians suggest that people do vibrations because the tympanum is 15
on a piano. not use swabs to clean out earwax. As to 30 times larger than the oval window.

 @
www.albertabiology.ca
 www
 well, there is a risk that an object inserted
 into the ear could damage the auditory
 canal and eardrum.
 The middle ear is connected to the
 throat by the thin Eustachian tube. This
 tube allows air pressure to equalize when
 The middle ear is an air-filled space there is a difference in air pressure within
 that is bordered on one side by the and outside the otherwise contained
 tympanum (also called the eardrum or middle ear. You may have noticed, while
 tympanic membrane). The tympanum driving on a mountain road or travelling
 is a round, elastic structure that vibrates in an airplane, that when the external air
 in response to sound waves. (The word pressure drops, the higher pressure within
 tympanum comes from the Greek word the middle ear can feel uncomfortable.
 for “drum.”) When sound waves push Chewing gum or yawning allows air in
 the tympanum, its vibrations are passed the Eustachian tube to connect with air
 on and amplified by the neighbouring in the throat, thus equalizing the
 ossicles: three tiny, interconnected bones pressure and making the ears “pop.”
 in the middle ear. The ossicles are the The inner ear consists of three
 smallest three bones in the body (Figures interconnecting structures: the
 12.20 and 12.21). Each bone acts as a semicircular canals, the vestibule, and
 lever for the next, so that a small the cochlea. The semicircular canals and
 movement in one results in a larger vestibule contain sensors for balance,
 movement in the next. As a result, the while the coiled cochlea (Latin for
 “snail”) is used for hearing. It is within
 /54%2 %!2 -)$$,% %!2 )..%2 %!2 the structures of the cochlea that the
 mechanical energy of sound is converted
 AUDITORY
 into the electrochemical impulses that
 SEMICIRCULAR CANAL
 NERVE are transmitted to the brain. Because the
 inner ear is fluid-filled, vibrations in the
 oval window must be converted to
 pressure waves in the fluid.
 Figure 12.21 also shows a cross
 section of a cochlea. The middle chamber
 OVAL contains the organ of Corti, which is the
 WINDOW organ of hearing. Along the base of the
 organ of Corti is the basilar membrane,
 COCHLEA
PINNA to which sensory mechanoreceptors
 %USTACHIAN known as hair cells are attached. The
 OSSICLES
 TUBE hair cells have thin projections called
 AUDITORY CANAL TYMPANUM stereocilia, which stick out at the top of
 the cells (Figure 12.22). The far ends of
 the stereocilia are embedded within the
Figure 12.20 The anatomy of the human ear. How are sound waves that
arrive at the outer ear amplified as their energy travels to the inner ear? tectorial membrane. When the stapes
 strikes the oval window, this vibrates the


420 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 MALLEUS STAPES SEMICIRCULAR CANALS
SKULL INCUS AUDITORY
 NERVE TO BRAIN TECTORIAL MEMBRANE STEREOCILIA TECTORIAL MEMBRANE
 AUDITORY
 NERVE HAIR CELL
 UPPER
 COCHLEAR
 CHAMBER
 DUCT



 BASILAR TYMPANIC
 COCHLEA MEMBRANE CHAMBER
 VESTIBULE BASILAR MEMBRANE
 OVAL WINDOW TYMPANIC CHAMBER
 ROUND
TYMPANUM WINDOW %USTACHIAN
 TUBE
 >ccZgZVg 8dX]aZV!Xgdhh"hZXi^dc Dg\Vcd[8dgi^
 Figure 12.21 The
window and creates pressure waves in Frequencies of Sound structure of the cochlea.
the fluid of the cochlea. The pressure Notice how membranes
 The hair cells of the organ of Corti are
 separate its three fluid-
waves make the basilar membrane move able to distinguish both the frequency filled chambers, the upper
up and down, which causes the stereocilia (pitch) and amplitude (intensity) of chamber, cochlear duct,
of the hair cells to bend against the sound waves. Frequency is the number of and tympanic chamber.
tectorial membrane. The hair cells, waves that pass through a specific point Since fluids cannot be
which synapse with the nerve fibres of compressed, the round
 every second. It is measured in hertz window bulges out as
the auditory nerve, sense the bending of (Hz). The frequency of speech usually pressure waves move
the stereocilia and relay this message to ranges from 100 to 4000 Hz, although through the inside of
the nerves. The nerves then send an humans can hear sounds that are the cochlea.
impulse to the brain. between 20 and 20 000 Hz. If you could
 ••• hear below 20 Hz, you would hear the
 blood moving through your ears!
 2 ofList,theinearorder,
  the structures
 that a sound wave
 Different areas of the organ of Corti are
 sensitive to different frequencies. High
 encounters, starting with the
 frequencies, such as the sound of a
 outer ear.
 whistle, most strongly stimulate the hair
 2 ofWhat
  happens to the energy
 sound waves, which travel
 cells that are closest to the oval window.
 Low frequencies, such as a low note
 through air, after it reaches the played by a tuba, most strongly stimulate
 tympanum? the hair cells that are farthest from the

 2 tube?
 What is the role of the Eustachian
 
 oval window. In the next investigation,
 you will test your ability to detect sounds
 of different frequencies.
 •••
 stereocilia




 Figure 12.22 Electron
 micrographs of hair cells
 hair
 and stereocilia from the
 cell
 organ of Corti. What causes
 the stereocilia to move?
Magnification: 836 × Magnification: 2196 ×


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 421
 INVESTIGATION 12.B Target Skills
 Performing experiments to measure
 the ability to discriminate objects
 visually and to hear a range of sounds
 Distinguishing Sights and Sounds Gathering and recording data
 Compiling and displaying data in an
 The sensory receptors of the eyes and ears allow the brain appropriate form
 to perceive a wide range of sights and sounds. In this
 investigation, you will determine your ability to
 Analysis
 discriminate different shades of colour, and you will
 examine the property of sound known as frequency 1. What factors allowed you to discriminate the
 or pitch. different shades most easily? Did your observations
 support or refute your hypothesis? Explain.
 Question
 2. Compare your results with the results of other students.
 What range of sights and sounds can you distinguish?
 Part 1: Distinguishing Shades of Colour Conclusions
 Hypothesis 3. Name the structures in the eye that are responsible
 for vision and colour discrimination. Which
 Write a hypothesis about which factors might affect your
 receptors did you rely on the most in step 5? Which
 ability to distinguish different shades of a colour.
 receptors did you rely on the most in steps 6 and 7?
 Materials Justify your answers by explaining how the different
 • liquid food colouring • water receptors work.
 • 5 beakers (100 mL) or 5 clear containers of equal size Part 2: Distinguishing Sound Frequencies ICT
 Prediction
 Procedure
 Predict the range of frequencies that you will be able
 1. Read the procedure, and create a table to record
 to hear.
 your data.
 2. Put an equal amount of water (about 50 mL) into Materials
 the five beakers (or clear containers). • device that produces a wide range of sound frequencies,

 such as a set of tuning forks, a frequency signal
 3. Label the beakers 1 through 5, so that the labels can
 generator, a Vernier or Pasco computer program that
 be concealed. Put 1 drop of food colouring in the first
 aids in analyzing different sound frequencies, or an
 beaker, 2 drops in the second, 3 drops in the third,
 Internet site that provides different tone frequencies
 4 drops in the fourth, and 5 drops in the fifth. Jiggle
 • frequency sensor (optional)
 the beakers gently to mix the samples.
 4. Have someone else change the order of the beakers. Procedure
 Then try to arrange the beakers from darkest to 1. Make a three-column table in your notebook to
 lightest colour. Check your success, and record any record your data for steps 2 and 3. In the first column,
 mistakes. list the frequencies that you will generate with your
 device. In the next column, predict whether or not
 5. Repeat step 4 with the five beakers in different
 you will be able to detect each frequency. You will use
 lightings: dark room, moderate lighting, and, if
 the third column in steps 2 and 3 to record whether
 possible, bright sunlight. Look straight at the
 or not you can hear each frequency and, if so, to
 beakers when you observe them.
 describe what you hear.
 6. Repeat step 5, but this time look at the beakers from
 2. Set up your test in a quiet location. If you are using a
 out of the corners of your eyes.
 frequency generator, turn it on. If a frequency sensor
 7. Repeat step 4 with the five beakers at several different is available, turn this on too, so you can use it to
 distances: for example, 1 m, 5 m, 10 m, and 20 m. record the exact frequencies generated.




422 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 3. Starting with the lowest frequency, check your ability 3. Compare your results with other students’ results or
 to hear the sound generated. Then switch to higher with data supplied by your teacher. Are there people
 frequencies in 1000 Hz increments, until you reach who can hear frequencies that you cannot, or vice
 the highest frequency that can be generated. At each versa? Suggest a reason for this.
 increment, fill in your data table.
 Conclusions
 4. Close your eyes, and have a partner generate a 4000 Hz 4. If you cannot hear certain frequencies within the
 sound at different locations around your head. range of 20 to 20 000 Hz, suggest a reason why.
 Indicate to your partner where the sound is coming Explain specifically what damage might have
 from. After the test, check with your partner to see occurred in your ears.
 if you were correct. Note the locations that you
 identified correctly. 5. In step 5, why was it easier to locate the source of a
 sound when the sound was directly in front of you
 Analysis or behind you, and more difficult to locate the source
 1. Name the specific structures of the inner ear that when the sound came from either side of you?
 allow us to discriminate different frequencies. How
 Extension
 did these structures function to allow you to hear
 sounds of different frequencies? 6. Research different causes of hearing loss. Contact
 an audiologist (hearing specialist), and arrange for
 2. What range of frequencies were you able to hear? a visit to learn how hearing tests are performed.
 Was your prediction correct?



Hearing Loss The amplitude of a sound wave is
Hearing loss generally results from nerve experienced as the intensity or volume of
damage (damage to the hair cells, called a sound. The louder the noise is, the more
nerve deafness) or damage to the sound- pressure that the fluid in the cochlea puts
conduction system of the outer or on the hair cells of the basilar membrane.
middle ear (called conduction deafness). The stereocilia of the hair cells are very
Birth defects, ear infections, noise, and delicate, however. Repeated or sustained
aging are common causes of hearing loss. exposure to loud noise destroys the
 stereocilia, and the resulting damage
 A is permanent (Figure 12.23). Noise is
 measured in decibels (dB), and any noise
 over 80 dB can damage the hair cells. In
 today’s society, people are commonly
 exposed to a variety of loud and
 potentially damaging noises (Table 12.3).

 Table 12.3 Noises That Affect Hearing
 Type of noise Sound level (dB) Effect
 B
 jet engine or over 125 Noise is beyond the threshold of
 rock concert pain. There is a high potential for
 hearing loss.
 boom box, chain saw, 100–125 Regular exposure for short periods
 or snowmobile of time may cause permanent
 hearing loss.
 farm tractor, lawn 90–100 15 min of exposure may cause
 mower, or motorcycle hearing loss.
Figure 12.23 Scanning electron
micrographs of stereocilia from a mouse ear. food blender or 80–90 Continuous daily exposure for
(A) Healthy stereocilia. (B) Stereocilia average city traffic longer than 8 h can cause damage.
damaged by brief exposure to a 115 dB noise. Source: United States National Institute of Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, September 2005.



 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 423
BiologyFile While hearing aids to amplify Balance and Coordination
 sounds can often help people with Three major structures in the inner
FYI
Many animals can hear
 conduction deafness, nerve deafness is ear—the semicircular canals, utricle,
frequencies of sound that more difficult to treat. In some cases, a and saccule—help us stand upright and
are outside the human device can be implanted in the ear to move without losing our balance (Figure
range of hearing. Whales pick up sounds and directly relay signals 12.24(A)). Thus, these structures
communicate regularly in
 to the auditory nerve. As well, researchers function in our sense of equilibrium.
frequencies below 20 Hz.
Bats and dogs can detect are exploring techniques to regenerate The semicircular canals contain
frequencies well above damaged or lost hair cells. One technique mechanoreceptors that detect head and
20 000 Hz. This explains is to use a virus to insert a gene into the body rotation (rotational equilibrium).
why humans cannot hear inner ear cells. The gene causes these cells
dog whistles.
 The semicircular canals are three fluid-
 to “sprout” new hair cells. So far, the filled loops, arranged in three different
 technique has worked in guinea pigs, but planes—one for each dimension of space.
 scientists are not yet sure if it will work as The base of each semicircular canal ends
 a treatment for people with nerve deafness. in a bulge. Inside each bulge, the stereocilia
 ••• of the hair cells stick into a jelly-like
 covering called a cupula. When the head
 2 State the parts of the ear that have
 been damaged in someone with
 rotates, the fluid inside the semicircular
 canals moves and bends the stereocilia,
 a) nerve deafness causing the hair cells to send rotational
 b) conduction deafness information to the brain (Figure 12.24(B)).
 ••• On a fast-spinning midway ride, for
 example, the rapid circular motion
 The Perception of Sound causes the fluid within the semicircular
 Sensory neurons in the ear send canals to rotate and send information
 information through the auditory confirming this to the brain. When the
 nerve to the brain stem, thalamus, and ride stops, however, the fluid is still
 ultimately the temporal lobes of the moving. Why might the moving fluid
 cerebrum for processing. Depending on make someone feel dizzy or nauseous?
 which sensory neurons are stimulated, The balance required while moving
 the brain can perceive the frequency and the head forward and backward is called
 amplitude of the sound. Recent research gravitational equilibrium. Gravitational
 suggests that the source of the sound equilibrium depends on the utricle and
 determines the specific neurons that the saccule, which together make up the
 are stimulated in the temporal lobes. fluid-filled vestibule of the inner ear
 Therefore, the brain can also perceive (Figure 12.24(A)). Both of these
 the location where the sound came from. structures contain calcium carbonate
 Next time you hear a sound in front or granules, called otoliths. The otoliths
 behind you, imagine a cluster of neurons lie in a cupula over a layer of hair cells.
 being stimulated in the corresponding When the head dips forward or back,
 area of your temporal lobes! gravity pulls on the otoliths. This puts
 pressure on some of the hair cells,
BiologyFile ••• causing them to send a neural impulse
Web Link
Describe how a hearing aid
 2 How
  is the brain able to perceive
 sounds of higher or lower
 to the brain, indicating the position of
 the head (Figure 12.24(C)).
and a cochlear implant frequencies and higher or lower Proprioceptors are another type
work, and compare how amplitudes?
sounds are perceived with of mechanoreceptor involved in
each type of technology. ••• coordination. Proprioceptors are found in
 muscles, tendons, and joints throughout
 @
www.albertabiology.ca
 www the body, and they send information
 about body position to the brain. For


424 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 RECEPTOR IN AMPULLA

 SEMICIRCULAR CANALS
 VESTIBULAR NERVE
 INNERVATES VESTIBULE
 UTRICLE AND SACCULE

 AMPULLAE

 COCHLEA
 !

 UTRICLE
 SACCULE
 VESTIBULE

 OTOLITHS
 OTOLITHIC
 CUPULA
 MEMBRANE
 HAIR CELL
 SUPPORTING CELL
 VESTIBULAR
 HAIR CELL NERVE
 SUPPORTING
 CELL
 VESTIBULAR
 NERVE

 FLOW OF FLUID


 STEREOCILIA



 HAIR CELL


 " #

 Figure 12.24 (A) The
example, proprioceptors give the brain Taste organs of balance: the
 semicircular canals, utricle,
enough information for you to get dressed The tongue contains chemoreceptors and saccule. Each
in the dark—although they do not ensure that allow us to taste substances entering semicircular canal ends in
that you will put on matching socks! the mouth. The ability to distinguish a bulge called an ampulla.
 (B) Rotational equilibrium.
 ••• different tastes probably developed as
 Rotating fluid bends the
 2 inner
 Explain how the structures of the
 
 ear allow for rotational
 an adaptation. Animals that avoided
 harmful substances and instead ate foods
 stereocilia in the cupula,
 and the hair cells send a
 that were good for the body survived message through the
 equilibrium.
 and reproduced. Poisonous plants, for vestibular nerve to the

 2 inner
 Explain how the structures of the
 
 ear allow for gravitational
 example, often contain bitter-tasting
 brain. (C) Gravitational
 equilibrium. The hair cells
 molecules made of alkaloid compounds. of the utricle and saccule
 equilibrium. Most scientists recognize four basic bend in response to head

 2 the
 How does the brain perceive that
 
 body is lying down?
 tastes: sour, sweet, salty, and bitter. When
 we eat, saliva dissolves some of our food.
 position.


 Specific molecules dissolved in the saliva
 •••

 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 425
 SENSORY
 EPIGLOTTIS TONSILS TASTE PORE SUPPORTING CELL NERVE FIBRE
 PAPILLAE




 " øM #
 TASTE BUD
 ! $

 MICROVILLI TASTE CELL CONNECTIVE
Figure 12.25 (A) Papillae TISSUE
on the tongue contain taste
buds that are sensitive to are detected by the taste buds: the bulb of the brain. From there, the
salty, sweet, sour, and bitter
molecules. (B) Electron sensory receptors in the bumps (papillae) impulse is sent to the emotional centres
micrograph of many on the tongue (Figure 12.25). Specific of the brain (the limbic system) and the
papillae. (C) Electron taste cells within the taste buds detect frontal lobe, where the perception of
micrograph of one papilla. molecules from one of the four basic tastes. odour occurs. Have you noticed that
(D) Taste cells within the
 Impulses from the taste buds travel particular odours can instantly conjure
taste buds. The taste buds
depolarize in response to areas of the brain stem, to the up scenes and emotions from the past?
to particular tastes and thalamus, and then to the gustatory Perfume experts create fragrances to
generate an action centre of the parietal lobe, which is evoke certain memories and emotions.
potential that sends a
 responsible for the perception of taste. The sense of smell is closely linked to
neural impulse to the brain.
 The combination of taste information the sense of taste. In fact, someone who
 sent from different areas of the tongue, is born without a functional olfactory
 as well as from sensory neurons in the system has no concept of taste, despite
 nose, allows us to perceive flavours. The having functional taste buds. As much as
 salivary glands are connected to the 80 to 90 percent of what we perceive as
 brain stem, which is why they are taste is actually due to the sense of smell.
 stimulated whenever we taste, smell, This is why everything tastes so bland
 or think about something delicious. when you have a cold. Molecules from
 food travel through the nose and the
 •••
 passages in the throat. There, they trigger
 2 taste.
 Describe how taste buds detect
 
 the chemoreceptors which, in turn,
 trigger the olfactory sensory neurons.
 ••• The sense of smell is what lets you
 experience the complex flavours that
 Smell you associate with your favourite foods.
 Scientists estimate that the human sense Many animals, including humans,
 of smell can distinguish over 10 000 release substances, called pheromones,
 different odours. They think that each of that aid in the recognition and attraction
 these odours is produced from particles of a mate, sometimes over long distances.
BiologyFile that fit, much like a lock and key, into These hormone-like chemicals are
FYI specific chemoreceptors, called olfactory detected in the nose by a structure
There is evidence for a fifth cells, lining the upper nasal cavity called the vomeronasal organ. Recently,
basic taste, called umami. (Figure 12.26). When the particles bind scientists determined that the human
Umami is described as a to the olfactory cells, ion channels in the nose also contains a vomeronasal organ,
savoury taste, characteristic
of monosodium glutamate
 cell membrane open. This generates an although people cannot consciously
(MSG), and detectable in action potential in the olfactory cells, smell pheromones.
some meats and cheeses. which are directly linked to the olfactory

426 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 ••• mechanical pressure or chemical signals. BiologyFile
 2 odours?
 How do the olfactory cells detect
  If tissue is damaged, for example, nerve
 cells called nociceptors release chemicals
 Try This
 Bend a paper clip into a
 that trigger pain receptors to send U-shape with the two ends
 2 evoke
 Why might a particular scent
 
 a strong emotional
 impulses to the brain. Painkillers, such as about 2 mm apart. Close
 your eyes, and gently push
 ibuprofen and Aspirin™, block the release
 response in a person? down on the palm of your
 of these chemicals. Everyone is familiar
 hand. Then try this on your
 ••• with the sensation of pain. How we shoulder. In which location
 experience pain and the effects of different could you distinguish the
Touch painkillers is highly subjective, however. prongs as separate? What
Unlike the mechanoreceptors associated How do our senses, such as the do your results suggest
 about the number of
with balance, hearing, taste, and smell, ability to feel pain, contribute to sensory receptors in the
the mechanoreceptors associated with homeostasis? Consider this question palm of your hand, relative
the sense of touch are located all over the as you complete Investigation 12.C. to your shoulder?
body. The skin contains more than four
 •••
million sensory receptors, but, as you
learned in Chapter 11, they are not 2 List
  the different types of stimuli
 that sensory receptors in skin
evenly distributed. Many of them are
 can detect.
concentrated in the genitals, fingers,
tongue, and lips.
 Different receptors in the skin are
 2 Where
  are the greatest
 concentrations of touch
sensitive to different stimuli, such as light receptors in the body?
touch, pressure, pain, and high and low •••
temperatures. These receptors gather
information and transmit it back through Sensation and Homeostasis Figure 12.26 (A) The
sensory neurons to the brain and spinal The senses allow us to navigate and human olfactory system.
cord for processing and a possible experience the world around us. The Trace how the smell of this
reaction (Figure 12.27 on page 429). rose is detected and then
 senses relay information to the nervous perceived in (B). The cilia of
 Pain is a complicated sense that system that allows the body to maintain each olfactory cell can bind
occurs when specialized sensors or nerve homeostasis. Seeing the bright morning to only one type of odour
endings in the skin are activated by molecule (represented here
 with colour).

FRONTAL LOBE OF A B
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE OLFACTORY BULB
 OLFACTORY TRACT
LIMBIC SYSTEM


OLFACTORY BULB NEURON

OLFACTORY
EPITHELIUM
 NASAL CAVITY BONE
 OLFACTORY GLAND
ODOUR SENSORY OLFACTORY CELL
MOLECULES NERVE
 OLFACTORY CILIA
 FIBRES
 OF OLFACTORY CELL


 OLFACTORY EPITHELIUM



 ODOUR
 SUPPORTING CELL
 MOLECULES


 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 427
 INVESTIGATION 12.C Target Skills
 Asking questions about observed
 relationships
 Designing an experiment to investigate
 Feel, Taste, or Smell: Design various sensory receptors
 Your Own Investigation Analyzing data to show interrelationships
 between the different senses

 How can you determine the range and types of
 information that each of your senses can detect? Your Suggested Materials
 group will explore one of the topics described below by • ginger • peppermint • vinegar
 designing, planning, and conducting an investigation. • lemon • pine needles • perfume
 You will need to show clearly how a specific sense (touch,
 • menthol • vanilla • blindfold
 taste, or smell) can distinguish numerous sensations.
 Experimental Plan
 Question
 1. As a group, record the question(s) that you plan
 How can you design an investigation to show how
 to investigate.
 a particular sense, or a combination of senses, can
 distinguish various sensations? 2. Write a hypothesis related to your experimental
 question(s).
 Safety Precautions
 • Do not bring food meant for consumption into 3. Using the suggested materials as a starting point,
 the laboratory. develop a procedure to investigate your topic. List the
 manipulated, responding, and controlled variables.
 • Do not eat or drink anything in the laboratory.
 Note what you can use as a control test or trial (point
 Topic 1: Feel Those Sensations of reference for your experimental trials).
 Design an investigation to distinguish the different 4. Decide how your group will make the appropriate
 sensory receptors found in the skin, including the measurements, how many samples you will use, and
 receptors for touch, pressure, pain, heat, and cold. whether you will pool your data with other groups’
 data. Design a table to record your data.
 Suggested Materials
 • 500 mL beaker of hot water (60 °C) 5. After obtaining approval from your teacher for your
 • 500 mL beaker of ice water (0–2 °C) experimental design, conduct your investigation.
 • non-permanent pen for marking gridlines on the body Data and Observations
 • alcohol thermometer • finishing nails Record your data. When you have completed your
 investigation, present your experimental design and
 Topic 2: Tantalize Those Taste Buds
 results to the rest of the class. Include a diagram that
 Design an investigation to distinguish the four basic tastes shows the neural pathway from the sensory receptors
 (sweet, salty, sour, and bitter) using the tongue. Also to the area of the brain where perception occurs.
 investigate the relationship between smell and taste.
 Note: You must conduct this investigation at home Analysis
 or in the school cafeteria, not in the laboratory. 1. Describe any unexpected results. Hypothesize if and
 how your results would have been different if you had
 Suggested Materials tested a combination of senses.
 • salty water • lemon juice
 2. How could you improve your experimental design?
 • sugary water or candy • garbage bin

 • onion juice or tonic water • blindfold Conclusion
 • clean toothpicks or cotton swabs 3. How are the sensory receptors organized so that we
 can distinguish different strengths and types of
 Topic 3: Expose Your Nose touch, taste, and smell?
 Design an investigation to determine the ability of
 the olfactory receptors to distinguish various smells.


428 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
 EPIDERMIS




 FREE NERVE ENDINGS
 -EISSNER CORPUSCLES
 PAIN HEAT COLD
 TOUCH




 -ERKEL DISCS
 TOUCH
 0ACINIAN CORPUSCLES
 PRESSURE



 +RAUSE END BULBS
 TOUCH
 2UFFINI ENDINGS
 DERMIS
 PRESSURE

 Figure 12.27 Various
ROOT HAIR PLEXUS TOUCH types of sensory neurons
 found in the skin

sunlight, for example, tells the body that • The hair cells synapse with nerve

it is time to wake up. Internal sensors fibres, which transmit the sensory
help to prevent you from slipping in the information to the nerves. The nerves
shower. In Chapter 13, you will explore then send an impulse to the brain.
how hormones—chemical messengers • Proprioceptors in the muscles, joints,

in the body—trigger responses to and tendons also inform the brain
sensations, as well as changes in the about the position of body parts.
body that we do not consciously feel. • Sensory receptors in the tongue (taste

 buds), nose (olfactory cells), and skin
Section 12.3 Summary (temperature, pressure, and pain
• The mechanoreceptors for hearing and receptors) provide additional
 balance are located in the inner ear. information to the brain.
• The cochlea, semicircular canals,

 utricle, and saccule all contain hair
 cells that react to movement.

 Section 12.3 Review

 1. Explain how the structures of the ear amplify sounds. 4. Suppose that you have been swimming along the
 bottom of the deep end of a pool. When you surface,
 2. How do the inner ear and brain distinguish the high
 you experience discomfort in your ears. Explain why
 shriek of a sea gull from the low sound made by a
 plugging your nose while gently exhaling may help to
 drum? What area of the brain perceives these sounds?
 alleviate the discomfort.
 3. Based on your understanding of the inner ear, explain
 5. Suppose that your aunt works long hours at a
 why someone might feel unwell after riding in a fast
 newspaper printing press, where she is constantly
 elevator in a tall building.
 exposed to sounds over 97 dB. What precautions, if
 any, would you recommend to her? Explain your answer
 in terms of the cellular structures of the inner ear.



 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 429
Connections Nature of Science


Pain Relievers or Deadly Neurotoxins?
Pain receptors called nociceptors are free nerve endings found throughout the skin and
internal organs. When tissue injury or chemical messengers stimulate the nociceptors,
they transmit information to the brain and we feel pain. Pain may be unpleasant, but
it usually serves as a warning to the brain to take action to prevent further injury.
However, for millions of Canadians who suffer from the chronic pain of headaches,
back pain, muscular-skeletal disorders, fibromyalgia, cancer, or AIDS, pain can be
debilitating. To help those with chronic pain, researchers are looking to natural—but
deadly—neurotoxins for targeted pain relief. Phyllobates terribilis


Poisonous Frogs and Pain Biodiversity: A Medicine Chest
The golden poison arrow frog (Phyllobates terribilis) Substances with medicinal potential come from some
secretes a powerful neurotoxin called batrachotoxin. For unlikely sources. For example, coral reefs are home to
centuries, aboriginal peoples of the Columbian rainforests over 500 species of cone snail (Conus), each of which
have used batrachotoxin in traditional spiritual rituals and produces a version of the deadly venom called conotoxin,
in healing and hunting practices. Before a hunt, arrows which the snails use to immobilize prey. Conotoxin
are dipped in a blend made from the frog’s secretions. contains a component that causes muscle paralysis, plus a
When the arrow penetrates the prey’s skin, the animal pain-reducing component, which blocks the acetylcholine
dies swiftly. Batrachotoxin affects the victim’s neurons receptors on pain transmission neurons. It could
by preventing sodium gates in the neural membrane potentially be used to control nerve pain caused by
from closing. The resulting constant stimulation leads surgery, diabetes, cancer, or AIDS.
to a depletion of neurotransmitters and irreversible Puffer fish, or fugu (Takifugu), is a popular delicacy
depolarization of nerves and muscle cells. Muscles in Japan, despite containing the deadly neurotoxin
throughout the body, most significantly the heart and tetrodotoxin. Ingesting even a milligram of tetrodotoxin
diaphragm, remain contracted, which causes rapid can be fatal. The toxin appears to work by blocking
paralysis and death. sodium ion channels in the neurons, which can lead to
 Researchers are now studying the neurotoxin for its respiratory paralysis. A Vancouver, British Columbia
use as a targeted pain medication. Severe pain is commonly company produces a purified form of tetrodotoxin called
treated with morphine, which suppresses the whole Tectin™, which has shown promise as a pain reliever for
central nervous system as it blocks the transmission of some people undergoing cancer treatment. Tetrodotoxin
pain signals to the brain from the receptors. Morphine is 3000 times stronger than morphine but in low doses
also interferes with other parts of the nervous system, appears to safely inhibit the pain neurons.
causing nausea, sedation, and confusion. In addition, •••
patients can build up a tolerance for the drug that makes
 1. Why might some organisms have evolved to contain
progressively higher doses necessary in order for it
 or secrete potent neurotoxins?
to work. Very small doses of neurotoxins such as
batrachotoxin could, on the other hand, be used to stop 2. The bacterium Clostridium botulinum produces
impulse transmission in the cell membranes of the pain botulinum toxin, which can cause fatal food poisoning.
receptors, without the side effects associated with morphine. Botulinum toxin inhibits the release of acetylcholine,
Scientists are searching the world’s jungles and oceans to resulting in paralysis. (A by-product, Botox®, is used
find organisms, including plants, snails, fish, bacteria, and to paralyze facial muscles and temporarily smooth
amphibians, which contain similar neurotoxins. wrinkles.) Knowing that one of the causes of migraine
 headaches is the constriction of arteries that bring
 blood to the brain, why might low doses of botulinum
 toxin be effective for controlling migraines?
 3. What are the advantages of targeted painkillers over
 those with more general effects?
Takifugu


430 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
Chapter 12

Sensory reception occurs at the senses. Sensation and ear. The vibrations in the oval window produce pressure
perception occur in the brain. Various sensory receptors waves in the fluid of the cochlea in the inner ear. The
detect information in the internal and external pressure waves are detected by hair cells, which relay
environments. Photoreceptors detect light. Chemoreceptors electrochemical messages to the brain via the auditory nerve.
detect tastes, odours, and internal conditions, such as blood Hearing aids that amplify sound can sometimes be used
pH and volume. Thermoreceptors detect temperature. to treat conduction deafness caused by damage to the outer
Mechanoreceptors function in hearing, balance, and or middle ear. Noise-induced hearing loss, caused by
coordination. destruction of the hair cells, is more difficult to treat. It
 The cornea, lens, and humours of the eye direct light on results in a loss of ability to hear sounds of specific frequencies.
the photoreceptor cells in the retina. Rods function in dim Hair cells in the semicircular canals of the inner ear
light and produce black and white images. Cones function allow for rotational equilibrium (balance). Hair cells in the
in bright light and produce colour images. The optic nerve utricle and saccule of the inner ear allow for gravitational
transmits signals from the rods and cones to the occipetal equilibrium (balance). Proprioceptors are another type of
lobe of the cerebral cortex, where images are perceived. The mechanoreceptor involved in coordination.
lens can accommodate to focus nearby or distant objects on Tastes are detected by chemoreceptors in the taste buds
the retina. of the tongue. Smells are detected by chemoreceptors in the
 The outer ear transmits sound waves to the middle ear, nose.
which makes the tympanum vibrate. This, in turn, makes The skin contains receptors for light touch, pressure,
the bones of the middle ear vibrate. These bones amplify pain, heat, and cold. Sensors in the nose, tongue, and skin
and transmit the vibrations to the oval window in the inner all help the nervous system maintain homeostasis.

 Chapter 12 Graphic Organizer

 4HE RETINA /LFACTORY RECEPTORS
 CONTAINS RODS IN THE NOSE DETECT
 AND CONES THAT OVER  
 DETECT LIGHT DIFFERENT ODOURS
 AND COLOUR




 PHOTORECEPTORS CHEMORECEPTORS
 THE BRAIN 4ASTE BUDS ON
 PERCEPTION THE TONGUE
 SENSORY RECEPTORS
 DETECT SALTY
 SENSATION
 SWEET SOUR
 AND BITTER TASTES
 MECHANORECEPTORS THERMORECEPTORS


 #ILIA WITHIN THE 2ECEPTORS IN THE SKIN
 INNER EAR DETECT DETECT TOUCH PAINFUL
 SOUND WAVES AND PRESSURE HEAT AND
 MOVEMENT 4HESE 0ROPRIOCEPTORS IN COLD
 CELLS ENABLE MUSCLES JOINTS AND
 HEARING AND BALANCE TENDONS HELP THE BODY
 TO MAINTAIN BALANCE




 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 431
Chapter 12
Understanding Concepts 11. Use word processing or graphics software to make a
 1. List the major structures in the pathway of neural flowchart mapping the events that occur from the time
 conduction from the organ of smell to the appropriate the light of a full Moon reaches your retina to the time
 area of the brain. your brain perceives it. ICT

 2. Draw a table in your notebook with the following 12. Studies show that some people who play action video
 headings: Photoreceptors, Mechanoreceptors, games can process visual information faster and pick
 Chemoreceptors, Thermoreceptors. For each type out more objects in a scene compared to people with
 of receptor, list what it detects and provide an example little or no experience playing video games. Which
 of a human sense organ that contains this receptor. area(s) of the brain must have been affected in the
 video game players?
 3. Copy the diagram of the eye into your notebook. Label
 the visible structures, and indicate their functions. Also 13. Which receptors does your body rely on when you are
 indicate the locations and functions of the rods and cones. standing still for a photo? Explain where these receptors
 are located, how they are stimulated, and how they send
 ! * information to the brain.
 "
 + 14. What happens in your eyes when you focus on the
 # words on this page? What is the process called? Use
 $ graphics software to sketch what happens to the lens
 %
 & of the eye when you focus on the words, and then when
 you look out the window at a bird in a tree. ICT
 '
 ( , 15. Using an example, compare rotational equilibrium
 ) with gravitational equilibrium. Identify the specific
 structures involved.
 4. Describe how the touch receptors transduce energy into
 a form that the nervous system can use. 16. The early stages of glaucoma tend to affect the
 peripheral vision. Why might someone with early
 5. People who have lost a limb in a war or accident often stage glaucoma want to avoid driving at night?
 report feeling sensations and even extreme pain in
 the limb that is no longer there. The cause of this 17. Which senses might be affected by an injury to one
 phenomenon, called phantom limb syndrome, is of the temporal lobes of the brain?
 unclear. Why is it possible for someone to perceive a 18. Use word processing software to make a flowchart
 sensation despite missing the associated sense receptors? tracing the pathway of a sound wave as it travels
 6. Explain how the inner ear and brain distinguish sounds through the outer, middle, and inner ear. Indicate
 of different frequencies and different volumes. where the auditory information is sent to the brain.
 Also indicate the principal structures involved and
 7. Once sensory neurons for a specific odour are their functions, and the specific area of the brain where
 stimulated, insensitivity to that odour rapidly occurs the perception of sound occurs. ICT
 both in the sensory neurons of the nose and in the
 brain. What is this phenomenon called? Why would 19. A heavy machinery operator is tested for hearing loss.
 it be an adaptive advantage in certain circumstances? It turns out that the operator has trouble hearing some
 frequencies of sound, but not others. Explain why.
 8. Explain what happens to the pupils of your eyes if you
 walk into a dark movie theater after a stroll outside on Applying Concepts
 a sunny day. What is this reflex called? 20. List some possible effects of sensory deprivation on
 9. Which kind of photoreceptor would you expect to be homeostasis. Suggest a hypothesis to explain why these
 most numerous in the retinas of an animal that hunts effects occur.
 at night? Explain your reasoning. 21. A severe blow to a particular area of the head can cause
10. When you close one eye, you may notice a blind spot in blindness. Describe how you would design a safety
 your field of vision. What is the blind spot? Why do you helmet to protect a cyclist from damage to the visual
 not see it all the time? centres of the brain.




432 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
22. How could you design a technology to treat red-blue Making Connections
 colour blindness? 28. Using what you know about threshold potential
23. Scientists have devised both retinal and cochlear (Chapter 11) and sensory receptors on the skin
 implants to compensate for non-functional sense (Chapter 12), explain why some individuals seem
 receptors. Explain what such devices could offer people to be more tolerant of pain than others.
 who have vision or hearing problems, compared with 29. Researchers have discovered that premature babies with
 technologies such as eyeglasses and hearing aids. apnea, a condition that causes them to stop breathing
24. Most parts of the body continue to grow new cells and during sleep, can be somewhat helped by having them
 discard old cells. The lens of the eye, however, is unique smell the scent of vanilla. Provide a possible explanation
 because it continues to get larger over time, and old, for this effect.
 dead cells cannot escape. The lens of an 8-year-old has a 30. Deadly neurotoxins produced by some organisms, such
 mass of about 130 mg, while the lens of an 80-year-old as the rattlesnake and black widow spider, could have
 has a mass of about 225 mg. Given this information, medical implications. One neurotoxin from rattlesnake
 why do you think older people often need eyeglasses? venom blocks receptors on postsynaptic neurons.
25. A dog’s sense of smell is so keen that a dog can detect Venom from the female black widow spider stimulates
 illegal drugs, and even evidence of bladder cancer in exocytosis of synaptic vesicles from neurons. Speculate
 human urine. Suggest possible structural adaptations how these neurotoxins might affect the body, and
 that a dog might have that would enable it to have such suggest a possible medical use for each of them.
 a superb sense of smell. 31. Would you use a technological device to enhance your
26. Stare at the green bird in the diagram for at least 1 min. eyesight beyond natural human capabilities, perhaps
 Then look in the cage. Do you see the bird in the cage? so that you could see farther and with more clarity, or
 Now stare at the red bird for 1 min. Then look in the sense infrared or ultraviolet light? Justify your response.
 cage. What do you see? The resulting effect in each case 32. Throughout the world, many natural habitats are
 is called an afterimage. How would you explain the quickly disappearing as a result of human activities.
 cause of an afterimage, given that the cone cells of the Explain how this situation might affect the discovery
 retina lose their sensitivity when they become fatigued? of new medications.
 33. The ancient Greeks, Egyptians, Sumerians, and Native
 Americans used an extract of willow bark known as
 salicin to treat aches and fever. The extract was later
 patented in a product known as Aspirin™. Some
 neurotoxins that Western scientists are now researching
 for use as painkillers have also been used in the
 traditional practices of Aboriginal peoples for centuries.
 Should traditional knowledge of medications continue
27. Dogs have two types of cones in the retina: one type to be patented and sold? If so, who should be paid for
 detects blue-violet light and the other type detects the patents on such “discoveries”?
 yellow light. Based on this information, which colours
 do you think dogs are most likely to see? Which colours
 would dogs likely have trouble distinguishing?




 Chapter 12 Sensory Reception • MHR 433
