D. choroid and cone cells 
 
10. A person who occasionally experienced paralysis was examined and found to have 
very low levels of potassium in the blood and other tissues. The paralysis likely 
resulted because of the inability of 
 
A. capillaries to provide adequate blood flow 
B. axon terminals to break down acetylcholine 
C. neurons to repolarize during the refractory period 
D. neurons to remove acetylcholine from the synapse 
 
Use the following information to answer the next three questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. The role of cholinesterase in neural transmission is to 
A. increase the rate of nerve impulse transmission 
B. promote the breakdown of a neurotransmitter 
C. increase the sensitivity of neural membranes 
D. promote the synthesis of a neurotransmitter 
 
12. Considering that the symptoms of Gulf War Syndrome include attention and memory 
problems, it is likely that pyridostigmine bromide has an effect on the 
A. cerebrum 
B. cerebellum 
C. hypothalamus 
D. medulla oblongata 
 
13. In myasthenia gravis, a malfunction of neuromuscular synapses occurs. The 
information presented above indicates that the muscular weakness associated with 
this disorder occurs because 
A. axons secrete excess acetylcholine 
B. axons secrete insufficient acetylcholine 
C. of increased permeability of membranes to sodium ions 
D. of decreased permeability of membranes to potassium ions 
 
Use the following information to answer the next question. 
 
 
 
 
 
More than 4 000 Gulf War veterans complain of illness (Gulf War Syndrome). The veterans’  
symptoms include joint pain, shortness of breath, attention and memory problems, and chronic  
fatigue. During the war, most of the veterans took anti-nerve-gas pills. These pills contain 
pyridostigmine bromide, a drug that inhibits cholinesterase.  Pyridostigmine bromide is also used to 
treat patients with myasthenia gravis, an inherited disorder characterized by weakness of skeletal 
muscles. 
 
Scientists had long assumed that the brain could not produce new cells. However, two  
researchers at the University of Calgary have successfully produced new brain tissue by using  
an unspecialized brain cell known as a stem cell. This stem cell acts as a “mother” cell to 
produce healthy brain tissue, in vitro. 
 