 
76. Which of the following types of ion movement across an axon membrane would 
cause the action potential to change during the interval from 0.2 ms to 0.4 ms? 
A. Sodium ions moving into the axon 
B. Sodium ions moving out of the axon 
C. Potassium ions moving into the axon 
D. Potassium ions moving out of the axon 
 
77. On the graph, the period from 0.5 ms to 1.0 ms represents the neuron’s 
A. refractory period, which is when repolarization occurs 
B. refractory period, which is when minimum depolarization occurs 
C. threshold period, which is when repolarization occurs 
D. threshold period, which is when minimum depolarization occurs 
 
 
Use the following information to answer the next four questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78. The site in the neural pathway where MAO is active is the 
A. axon 
B. synaptic cleft 
C. cell body 
D. Schwann cell 
 
79. The area of the brain that normally initiates the fight-or-flight response is the 
A. pons 
B. cerebrum 
C. cerebellum 
D. hypothalamus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use the following additional information to answer the next two questions. 
 
 
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is an enzyme that breaks down the neurotransmitters dopamine,  
serotonin, and norepinephrine. Individuals who are involved in extreme sports, such as rock  
climbing, generally have low levels of MAO and, therefore, higher-than-normal levels of these 
neurotransmitters. 
 
Dopamine and serotonin are linked to pleasurable feelings. Norepinephrine is released in the  
fight-or-flight response. One hypothesis for why individuals participate in extreme sports is  
that in order for individuals with high resting levels of these neurotransmitters to achieve a 
pleasurable sensation, they require a greater surge of these chemicals than do other people.  
 
—from Zorpette, 1999 
 
Serotonin stimulates the release of endorphins, and endorphins eventually cau se the release of 
more dopamine. Studies of individuals involved in extreme sports have found that these  
people have lower-than-normal numbers of two of the five types of dopamine receptors. 
 
—from Zorpette, 1999 
 