A. The pituitary would become saturated with non-radioactive iodine and this 
would limit the absorption of radioactive iodine. 
B. The thyroid would become saturated with non-radioactive iodine and this 
would limit the absorption of radioactive iodine. 
C. Increased levels of iodine would stimulate hormonal production by the 
pituitary and limit tumor formation. 
D. Increased levels of iodine would stimulate hormonal production by the 
thyroid and limit tumor formation. 
 
5. If a tumor caused increased secretion of thyroxine, which symptoms would likely be 
experienced by an affected person? 
A. Increased body temperature and increased metabolic rate 
B. Increased body temperature and decreased metabolic rate 
C. Decreased body temperature and increased metabolic rate 
D. Decreased body temperature and decreased metabolic rate 
 
6. The pituitary hormone ACTH regulates the production of aldosterone by the cortex of 
the adrenal glands. A severe drop in ACTH levels would likely result in 
A. decreased sodium ion retention and increased water loss because 
aldosterone levels would rise 
B. decreased sodium ion retention and increased water loss because 
aldosterone levels would drop 
C. increased sodium ion retention and increased water retention because 
aldosterone levels would rise 
D. increased sodium ion retention and increased water retention because 
aldosterone levels would drop 
 
7. Sensory and motor neurons of the peripheral nervous system transmit impulses 
between muscles and the 
A. parasympathetic nervous system 
B. sympathetic nervous system 
C. central nervous system 
D. endocrine system 
 
8. Which sequence correctly shows the path of sound transmission in the ear? 
A. Tympanic membrane eustachian tube semicircular canals cochlea 
B. Tympanic membrane semicircular canals eustachian tube cochlea 
C. Auditory canal ossicles tympanic membrane organ of Corti 
D. Auditory canal tympanic membrane ossicles organ of Corti 
 
9. A person with a vitamin A deficiency may have night blindness. The glare from the 
headlights of an approaching car will temporarily reduce that person’s visual 
capacity. The primary structures associated with this change are the 
A. cornea and lens 
B. retina and rod cells 
C. fovea and blind spot 