Bio 30 Nervous System and Homeostasis January Diploma Exam Questions 
 
January 1996 
 
1. Which gland produces a hormone that directly increases blood supply to skeletal 
muscles and increases the rate of contraction of heart muscle? 
A. Pancreas 
B. Adrenal gland 
C. Thyroid gland 
D. Pituitary gland 
 
2. Which sequence illustrates a mechanism used by the body to control the blood 
glucose level? 
A. Blood glucose increasesrelease of glucagon increasesconversion of 
glycogen into glucose decreasesblood glucose decreases 
B. Blood glucose decreasesrelease of glucagon decreasesconversion  
of glycogen into glucose decreasesblood glucose increases 
C. Blood glucose increasesrelease of insulin increasesconversion of 
glucose into glycogen increasesblood glucose decreases 
D. Blood glucose decreasesrelease of insulin decreasesconversion of 
glucose into glycogen increasesblood glucose increases 
 
 
Use the following information to answer the next question. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. The inhaled spray would likely contain  
A. insulin 
B. glucagon 
C. aldosterone 
D. antidiuretic hormone 
1 
Use the following information to answer the next two questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. How would the ingestion of large doses of non-radioactive iodine reduce a person’s 
chances of getting a tumor in a particular gland? 
 
Diabetes insipidus is a disorder of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland or hypothalamus 
resulting in decreased secretion of a specific hormone. This disorder is characterized by the  
excretion of large volumes of urine and subsequent dehydration and thirst.  
A person with diabetes insipidus can be treated by inhaling a spray containing the hormone 
that is deficient. The spray is inhaled several times a day. 
 
When the Chernobyl nuclear reactor in Ukraine melted down, clouds of radioactive material,  
including iodine, were released into the atmosphere. Iodine is actively absorbed by a certain 
gland in the body. Scientists were worried that the radioactive iodine would cause tumours in  
this gland. In an attempt to avoid this problem, people who lived near the reactor were given  
large doses of non-radioactive iodine. 
 