 
 
22. Which of the following statements is true of the threshold potential? 
A. It is the same electrical potential for all neurons. 
B. It is the depolarization required to generate an action potential.  
C. It determines the time it takes for an action potential to be completed.  
D. It determines the time it takes for an impulse to travel along the axon. 
 
23. Relative to inside of a neuron, the extracellular fluid immediately outside a resting 
neuron’s cell membrane is 
A. positive and the sodium ion concentration is less 
B. negative and the sodium ion concentration is less 
C. positive and the sodium ion concentration is greater 
D. negative and the sodium ion concentration is greater 
 
Use the following information to answer the next two questions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Numerical Response 
 
 2. An impulse arrives at an axon terminal that synapses with a muscle cell. Record 
the processes in the order that they occur at the synapse. 
 
(Record your four-digit answer in the numerical-response section of the answer sheet.) 
Answer: ___2314_______ 
 
 
24. Certain chemicals inhibit cholinesterase at neuromuscular junctions. The resulting 
muscular spasms occur because of the 
A. depletion of cholinesterase in the presynaptic neuron 
B. depletion of acetylcholine in the neuromuscular junction 
C. accumulation of cholinesterase in the presynaptic neuron 
D. accumulation of acetylcholine in the neuromuscular junction 
 
Use the following information to answer the next question. 
 
 
Processes That Occur at a Neuromuscular Junction 
(A Type of Synapse) 
 
1 Muscle fibres contract when sodium gates open allowing sodium ions to diffuse into the  
muscle cytoplasm. 
2 Acetylcholine is released from the axon terminal. 
3 Acetylcholine binds to the receptors on the muscle cell. 
4 Cholinesterase breaks down acetylcholine, and the sodium gates close. 
—from Guyton 
Twenty-two once-paralyzed rats can now move their hind legs and even take awkward steps.  
Their damaged spinal cords have been partially repaired by surgically grafting nerve fibres  
from another part of their bodies to the damaged area. 
—from Flam 
 