5-25Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR
tissue characterized by many nerve cell bodies and very
few myelinated axons. Grey matter looks reddish grey on
a freshly removed brain. White matter is composed of
axon nerve fibres that are covered by a myelin sheath.
2. Students’ drawings should show numerous neurons
enclosed in a sheath. The neurons are the functional units
of the nervous system. These cells transmit regulatory
information in the form of electrochemical impulses.
3. Students’ drawings should be similar to Figure 11.6 on
page 369 of the student textbook. A stimulus causes
sensory receptors to generate a nervous impulse that
travels along sensory axons to the spinal cord.
Interneurons integrate data from sensory neurons and
then relay signals to motor neurons. Motor axons convey
nerve impulses from the spinal cord to an effector such as
a skeletal muscle.
4. Students’ drawings should include the dendrites, cell
body, and axon. The impulse should indicate that
dendrites transmit the nervous impulse to the cell body
while the axon transmits the nerve impulse away from the
cell body.
5. Students’ drawings should include the axon, the myelin
sheath, a Schwann cell (including the nucleus), and a
node of Ranvier. The myelin sheath protects the
myelinated neuron and speeds the rate of nerve impulse
transmission.
6. Students’ drawings should include the end plates of a
motor neuron, the synapse, and the muscle fibre. Students
will be learning that special chemical messengers
(neurotransmitters) carry the neural signal from the
neuron to the muscle fibre.
7. Students’ answers will depend on the slide or slides that
you have provided.
Assessment Options
■ Collect and assess students’ answers to the Analysis
questions, including their drawings.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 382
Q17. Neurotransmitters have either excitatory or inhibitory
effects on the postsynaptic membrane. If the effect is
excitatory, the receptor proteins will trigger the opening
of ion channels that allow positive ions, such as sodium,
to flow into the postsynaptic neuron. This depolarizes
the postsynaptic membrane and, if the threshold
potential is reached, initiates an action potential. The
impulse that is initiated will travel along the axon to the
next neuron or effector.
If, however, the neurotransmitter has an inhibitory
effect, the receptor protein will trigger hyperpolarization
of the membrane. This means that the inside of the axon
will become even more negatively charged. As a result,
the membrane will not depolarize and there will be no
action potential.
Q18. Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that crosses a
neuromuscular junction. Acetylcholine excites the
muscle cell membrane, causing depolarization and
contraction of the muscle fibre. 
Cholinesterase is an enzyme that is released into a
synapse to break down acetylcholine. Cholinesterase is
one of the fastest acting enzymes; in a fraction of a
second it breaks down acetylcholine and removes it from
the protein receptors, thus allowing the ion channels to
close and the membrane to repolarize.
Thought Lab 11.1: The Effect of Drugs 
on Neurons and Synapses
Student Textbook page 383
Purpose
Students will analyze and explain how different drugs affect
neural impulses, work cooperatively to investigate the effects
of a drug on neurons or neural synapses, and hypothesize
what might make some drugs addictive.
Outcomes
■ 30-A1.2sts
■ 30-A1.4s
Advance Preparation
When to Begin What to Do
3 to 4 weeks before ■ Contact agencies such as
Alberta Alcohol and Drug
Addiction Commission
(AADAC) to obtain print
resources that discuss drug
dependency.
■ Contact agencies such as
AADAC to request one of
their counsellors to talk to
your students.
■ Book the computer lab
and/or library for two class
periods.
■ Talk to your school’s
Resource Officer to see if
he/she has any information
on drug dependency.
■ Find out whether a local
doctor would be willing to
present to your students on
the effects of drugs on the
nervous system. 