attention to the safety precautions that students include in
their experimental design. Also make sure that the students
are actually investigating a reflex in the human body.
Safety Precautions
■ Remind students that they do not have to hit hard when
testing for the knee-jerk (patellar) reflex. 
■ Caution students that even a cotton ball can cause damage
to the eye, including scratching the cornea. Make sure they
understand that they should not throw the cotton ball hard
and that the subject’s eyes should be protected by the
plastic shield during this part of the activity.
Answers to Analysis Questions
1. Students’ answers should be similar to Figure 11.8 on
page 370 of the student textbook. Make sure that
students label the stimulus, sensory neuron, cell body of
the sensory neuron, interneuron in the spinal cord, cell
body of the motor neuron in the grey matter of the spinal
cord, the motor neuron, and the effector (muscle).
2. Because reflex arcs use very few neurons to transmit
messages, reflexes can be rapid and a response can happen
before there is an awareness that a reaction is necessary.
This means that contact with a dangerous stimulus is
minimized.
Answer to Conclusion Question
3. The pupillary reflex will protect the retina from bright
light. The blink reflex will protect the cornea and other
structures of the eyeball from contact with objects. The
knee-jerk reflex can be used by doctors to diagnose certain
neurological disorders or an injury to the muscles in the
thigh (i.e., a pulled hamstring muscle).
Answers to Extension Questions
4. When a student moves her hand upon touching a hot
glass, it is an example of the withdrawal reflex. Receptors
in the skin sense the heat and initiate an impulse in the
sensory neurons. The impulse carried by the sensory
neuron then activates the interneuron in the spinal cord.
The interneuron signals the motor neuron to instruct the
muscle to contract and withdraw the hand. A reflex arc
initiates a reaction before the brain has had a chance to
process the sensory information. However, once the brain
has interpreted the sensory information, the student will
feel pain.
5. Students can now build on their previous experiences and
learn more about reflex arcs. Students can quantify their
data by measuring the distance the foot moved during the
knee reaction by marking the starting and ending points
on a piece of cardboard. Alternatively, they could use a
protractor to measure the angle of change in the knee. Eye
pupil data may be scored as a plus or minus to indicate
whether the reaction occurred in a number of students.
Once again, make sure that students are conducting
investigations that do not cause harm to sense organs. For
example, if you are going to allow them to “pop” a
balloon near an unsuspecting student, make sure that they
do not pop the balloon close to the other person’s ear.
Assessment Options
■ Collect and assess students’ answers to Analysis questions 1
and 2, Conclusion question 3, and Extension question 4.
■ Use Assessment Checklist 4: Performance Task Group
Assessment for Appendix A.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 372
Q7. Students’ drawings should be similar to the motor
neurons shown in Figure 11.9 on page 372 of the student
textbook. The diagram should include the following
labels: dendrites, cell body, axon, Schwann cell, and the
node of Ranvier.
Q8. The axons of some neurons are enclosed in a fatty,
insulating layer called the myelin sheath, which gives the
axons a glistening white appearance. These axons are said
to be myelinated. The myelin sheath protects myelinated
neurons and speeds the rate of nerve impulse
transmission. Schwann cells, a type of glial cell, produce
myelin in certain parts of the CNS and PNS.
Figure 11.10
Student Textbook page 373
Much of what neurologists have learned about how neurons
function comes from experiments done with a giant squid,
Loligo. The neuron used for rapid tail movements has an axon
that reaches from the head of the squid to the end of its tail.
The axon is about 1 mm in diameter, or 100 to 1000 times
the diameter of a human axon. The size of the axon allows
scientists to measure the charge difference across the cell
membrane quite easily by inserting tiny electrodes into the
axon and then reading the charge difference from a specialized
voltmeter. This technique has provided extensive information
about how a voltage gradient is established across the axon
membrane and how a neural impulse is generated.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 374
Q9. The charge difference across the membrane in a resting
neuron is called the resting membrane potential. The
resting membrane potential of most unstimulated
neurons is –70 mV (millivolts), and it is more negative
on the inside. The resting membrane potential provides
energy for the generation of a nerve impulse in response
to an appropriate stimulus.
5-20 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems