5-21Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR
Q10. Neurons achieve polarization (i.e., generate resting
membrane potential) in 3 ways:
1. Some negatively charged substances, such as proteins
and chloride ions (Cl–), are trapped inside the cell and
unable to diffuse out through the selectively
permeable cell membrane.
2. Sodium ions (Na
+) and potassium ions (K+) cannot
diffuse unaided from one side of the cell membrane
to the other. Special membrane proteins, however, can
use the energy of ATP to pump charged particles
across the membrane. This sodium-potassium pump
pumps out 3 sodium ions for every 2 potassium ions
pumped into the cell, which results in an unequal
distribution of positive charges on either side of the
membrane. The buildup of positive charges on the
outside of the cell creates an electric potential.
3. Special transport proteins form ion-specific channels
that allow potassium ions to diffuse down their
concentration gradient and out of the cell. There are
sodium ion channels as well, but, in a resting neuron,
there are more open channels for potassium ions than
for sodium ions. As a result, more potassium ions
diffuse out of the cell relative to the number of
sodium ions diffusing in, which contributes to the
buildup of positive charges on the outside of the
membrane.
Investigation 11.B: Modelling Resting 
Membrane Potential
Student Textbook pages 375
Purpose
Students will build a model of the neural membrane to
demonstrate how the resting membrane potential is
established.
Outcomes
■ 30-A1.2s
■ 30-A1.3s
■ 30-A1.4s
Advance Preparation
Time Required
45 minutes
Helpful Tips
■ Use BLM 11.1.8: Investigation 11.B to support this
activity. Modify as necessary.
■ T o make 500 mL of the 3 mol/L solution of NaCl, add
58.44 grams of sodium chloride to a 500 mL volumetric
flask. Add distilled water to bring the volume in the flask
up to 500 mL. This is a very concentrated solution and it
may take several minutes for all of the NaCl to dissolve.
■ T o make 100 mL of 3 mol/L solution of KCl, add 22.36
grams of potassium chloride to a 100 mL volumetric flask.
Add distilled water to bring the volume in the flask up to
100 mL. This is also a very concentrated solution and it
may take several minutes for all of the KCl to dissolve.
■ Make sure that the students clean the copper wire with
steel wool or sandpaper to remove any insulation or signs
of oxidation. 
■ Strips of copper metal can be substituted for the copper
wire. The key thing is to provide maximum surface area for
the chemical reaction.
■ Demonstrate how to open the dialysis tubing and how to
secure it with a knot at the end as well as securing it tightly
with the piece of string. If the dialysis bag is not tied
securely, the potassium chloride solution will leak out
before the students can attach their voltmeter to the copper
strips.
■ Demonstrate how to set up and use the DC millivolt
meter (multimeter) before students begin the activity.
■ Assign students to groups of three or four. T wo students
can set up the equipment, a third student can time the
experiment, and a fourth student can record the results. 
Materials
■ 22 cm of moistened dialysis tubing
■ 2 strips of uninsulated copper wire, each 40 cm long
■ string
■ elastic band
■ pen
■ DC millivolt meter
■ 400 mL beaker
■ 3 mol/L sodium chloride (NaCl) solution (500 mL per group)
■ 3 mol/L potassium chloride (KCl) solution (100 mL per group)
When to Begin What to Do
1 or 2 days before ■ Photocopy Assessment
Checklist 2: Laboratory
Report from Appendix A if
you want your students to
generate a full lab report for
this activity.
When to Begin What to Do
1 or 2 days before ■ Photocopy BLM 11.1.8:
Investigation 11.B
■ Gather the materials and
prepare the sodium
chloride and potassium
chloride solutions.