brings about those responses associated with “fight-or
flight” and the parasympathetic division brings about those
responses associated with “rest-and-digest.”
Teaching Strategies
■ This is a brief section that brings the information in the
previous two into the bigger picture of how the nervous
system co-ordinates both voluntary and involuntary
activity in the body.
■ The Connections feature on neurological disorders among
pets can be used to spark debate on pet care or the more
contentious subject of animal research (as an extension of
question 2: If co-incidental insights are helpful, is it ethical
to purposely use animals to learn more about conditions or
potential treatments for humans?) 
■ T wo BLMs have been prepared to support the information
in this section. You will find them with the Chapter 11
BLMs on the CD that accompanies this T eacher’s Resource
or at www.albertabiology.ca, after logging in to the
Instructor Edition at the Online Learning Centre.
Number (Type)
11.3.1 (HAND) Map of the Spinal Nerves
11.3.1A (ANS/OH) Map of the Spinal Nerves Answer Key
11.3.2 (OH) Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Nervous
Systems
■ Although this is a very short section, some of the terminology
introduced in this section could pose a challenge, especially for
those students whose first language is not English. Students
could add key terms to their personal vocabulary list.
■ Some learners may grasp an idea better by looking at diagrams
or pictures. Use the various blackline masters provided in this
Teacher’s Resource to help these students.
■ Create a 2- or 3-page study guide of ideas in the section. This
guide can be of great assistance to students who struggle with
print materials, lectures, or even organization of information. The
guide could be in paragraph form, point form, a graphic
organizer, or a combination. It might also spotlight key
vocabulary and provide essential questions the section is
designed to address.
Figure 11.34
Student Textbook page 396
In order for a football player to catch a ball, motor neurons to
the muscles of the arms, shoulders, and fingers would have to
work in conjunction with motor neurons that maintain
balance and posture. Signals to these motor neurons would
originate in the primary motor cortex and in the cerebellum
and be transmitted to the muscles by motor neurons that
leave the spinal cord.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 396
Q28. The major structures of the somatic nervous system are
12 pairs of myelinated cranial nerves and 31 pairs of
myelinated spinal nerves.
Q29. The somatic system is largely under voluntary control,
and its neurons service the head, trunk, and limbs. Its
sensory neurons carry information about the external
environment inward to the brain, from the receptors in
the skin, tendons, and skeletal muscles. Its motor
neurons carry information to the skeletal muscles.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 399
Q30. The motor neurons involved in the autonomic nervous
system are part of either the sympathetic nervous system
or the parasympathetic nervous system, and either
stimulate or inhibit the glands or the cardiac or smooth
muscle.
Q31. Stress or danger is likely to trigger a response from the
sympathetic nervous system, sometimes called a “fight-
or-flight” response. The sympathetic neurons release a
neurotransmitter called norepinephrine, which has an
excitatory effect on its target muscles. As well, the
sympathetic nerves trigger the adrenal glands to release
epinephrine and norepinephrine, both of which also
function as hormones that activate the stress response. At
the same time, the sympathetic nervous system inhibits
some areas of the body. For example, in order for
someone to be able to run from danger, the skeletal
muscles need a boost of energy. Therefore, blood
pressure increases and the heart beats faster, while
digestion slows down and the sphincter controlling the
bladder relaxes.
Q32. The parasympathetic nervous system is activated when
the body is calm and at rest. Sometimes referred to as
the “rest-and-digest” response, the parasympathetic
nervous system slows the heart rate, reduces blood
pressure, promotes the digestion of food, and stimulates
the reproductive organs by dilating blood vessels to the
genitals. The parasympathetic system uses a
neurotransmitter called acetylcholine to control organ
responses. 
Section 11.3: Review Answers
Student Textbook page 399
1. The peripheral nervous system lies outside of the central
nervous system. Sensory neurons carry information to the
CNS, and motor neurons carry information away from
the CNS. The central nervous system receives the sensory
information and initiates an appropriate motor response.
5-35Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR