Biology File: Try This
Student Textbook page 389
The water in the first container should provide some degree of
protection for the egg. The egg in the empty container will
probably break almost immediately. This demonstrates the
protective function of the cerebrospinal fluid for the brain.
Students should note, however, that if shaken hard enough,
even the egg in the water-filled container will break.
Figure 11.27
Student Textbook page 389
At this point, students will not likely be able to identify the
specific functions of the cerebral cortex. They may have some
idea that the right side of the brain controls the left side of the
body and vice versa. Students will learn more about the
specific areas of the brain later in this section. However, if
time permits, you might want them to explore the idea of
cerebral dominance. For example, some scientists believe that
each hemisphere of the brain is dominant for different 
behaviours. It appears that the right brain is dominant for
spatial abilities, face recognition, visual imagery, and music.
The left brain may be more dominant for calculations, math
and logical abilities. The cerebral cortex contains many ridges
called gyri and grooves called sulci. These structures provide
the brain with a greater surface area to fit more neurons into a
smaller space.
Figure 11.30
Student Textbook page 391
The muscles of the face, lips, jaw, and tongue, and the
muscles of the hands have a relatively larger area of the
cerebral cortex devoted to their movement compared to the
muscles in other areas of the body. This is why the girl’s face
and hands in the illustration are drawn so large.
It is also interesting to note that this closely parallels the
amount of sensory cortex devoted to certain sensory areas of
the body: The face, lips, tongue, hands, and genitals also have
a comparatively large amount of sensory cortex devoted to
them. So these areas of the body not only are the most
sensitive to touch, but also have the greatest amount of motor
control.
Biology File: Try This
Student Textbook page 392
A theory is that one side of the brain is involved with muscle
movements, like moving your leg, while the other side is
involved with such as mathematic task activities and drawing
numbers. When you try to do both activities at once, the left
brain and right brain are conflicted, and the signals get
confused. 
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 392
Q23. The following chart identifies the 4 lobes of the
cerebrum and describes the function of each.
Q24. The areas of the brain responsible for fine motor control
of the muscles are the frontal lobe of the cerebrum and
Lobes of the
Cerebrum
Functions
frontal lobe associated with conscious thought,
intelligence, memory, and personality; controls
voluntary muscle movements
temporal lobe involved in auditory reception
parietal lobe receives sensory information from the skin,
and processes information about body position
occipital lobe processes visual information
Region Structure Function
medulla
oblongata
■ controls automatic, involuntary
responses such as heart rate,
blood pressure, breathing,
swallowing, and coughing
pons ■ a relay centre between the
neurons of the right and left
hemispheres of the cerebrum,
the cerebellum, and the rest of
the brain
midbrain midbrain ■ relays visual and auditory
information between areas of
the hindbrain and forebrain
■ plays important role in eye
movement and control of
skeletal muscles
forebrain thalamus ■ provides connections between
the forebrain and hindbrain, and
between areas of the sensory
system and cerebellum
hypothalamus ■ controls blood pressure, heart
rate, body temperature, basic
drives, emotions
■ major link between the nervous
and endocrine systems
cerebrum ■ contains centres for intellect,
memory, consciousness, and
language
■ interprets and controls the
response to sensory information
5-30 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems