the cerebellum. The area that processes sensory
information from the skin is the parietal lobe of the
cerebrum.
Q25. The process of speech involves several areas of the
cerebrum. T wo important areas are on the left side of the
cerebrum: Broca’s area (in the frontal lobe) and
Wernicke’s area (in the temporal lobe). Broca’s area
coordinates the muscles for speaking and translates
thought into speech. Damage to this area results in an
inability to speak. It does not, however, affect the
understanding of language. Wernicke’s area stores the
information involved in language comprehension. The
ability to utter words is not affected if this area is
damaged, but the words make little sense. 
Biology File: Web Link
Student Textbook page 392
There are a number of arguments for and against the use of
virtual dissections in the classroom. Those in favour of virtual
dissection argue that computer simulations are better suited
for dissection because the cost is lower, the animals are
protected, and students are guided through the process. Those
who are not in favour of virtual dissection argue that actual
dissections are better because they provide a 3-dimensional
view of the organism and students gain an appreciation for
the complexity of organisms. 
Investigation 11.D: The Brain
Student Textbook pages 393–394
Purpose
Students will observe and identify the principal structures and
functions of a mammalian brain using dissections or other means.
Outcomes
■ 30-A1.1sts
■ 30-A1.2s
■ 30-A1.4s
Advance Preparation
Please note that the following information pertains to the
hands-on dissection of an actual mammalian brain.
Time Required
1 hour
Helpful Tips
■ Use BLM 11.2.7: Investigation 11.D to support this
activity. Modify it as necessary.
■ This investigation can be done either as a hands-on activity
or as a virtual experience. Web links related to a virtual
dissection of the mammalian brain can be found at
www.albertabiology.ca. Select Instructor Edition and
follow the links to Chapter 11.
■ Before students start the dissection, remind them of all
safety precautions. 
■ Remind students that dissection involves the careful and
systematic examination of the structures of an organism. 
■ If you are planning to use a fresh mammalian brain, make
sure that it has been properly inspected for infectious
agents and that it is refrigerated. For more information,
refer to Alberta Education’s publication Safety in the Science
Classroom. The web link can be found at
www.albertabiology.ca. Select T eacher Resources and
follow the links to Chapter 11. 
■ Group your students in teams of 4 to reduce the number
of specimens that you have to purchase. 
■ Have students make “flags” out of straight pins and
masking tape. They can write on the masking tape the
names of the different regions and lobes of the mammalian
brain and then insert the pin in the appropriate structure.
This will ensure that they have taken the time to actually
find each region of the brain. It could also be used as a
formative evaluation tool for this activity.
Materials
■ goggles 
■ apron
■ tongs
■ dissecting tray
■ dissecting kit
■ preserved sheep brain
■ paper towel
■ disposable plastic gloves
■ 10% bleach solution (to clean the dissecting tray)
When to Begin What to Do
3 to 4 weeks before ■ Check supply of safety
equipment (gloves, aprons,
goggles) and replace if
needed.
2 days before ■ Photocopy BLM 11.2.7:
Investigation 11.D
■ Organize dissecting tools
and instruments
When to Begin What to Do
3 to 4 weeks before ■ Check supply of mammalian
brains; order as required.
■ Check local policies for
information on the proper
disposal of mammalian
organs.
5-31Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR