5-23Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR
time to diffuse into the dialysis tube than potassium
ions take to diffuse out. 
(b) The factors that establish a negative resting
membrane potential in a neuron are as follows:
1. Some negatively charged substances, such as
proteins and chloride ions (Cl
–), are trapped inside
the cell and unable to diffuse out through the
selectively permeable cell membrane.
2. Sodium ions (Na
+) and potassium ions (K+) cannot
diffuse unaided from one side of the cell
membrane to the other. Special membrane
proteins, however, can use the energy of ATP to
pump charged particles across the membrane. This
sodium-potassium pump moves out 3 sodium ions
for every 2 potassium ions pumped into the cell,
which results in an unequal distribution of positive
charges on either side of the membrane. The
buildup of positive charges on the outside of the
cell creates an electric potential.
3. Special transport proteins form ion-specific
channels that allow potassium ions to diffuse down
their concentration gradient and out of the cell.
There are sodium ion channels as well, but, in a
resting neuron, there are more open channels for
potassium ions than for sodium ions. As a result,
more potassium ions diffuse out of the cell relative
to the number of sodium ions diffusing in, which
contributes to the buildup of positive charges on
the outside of the membrane.
Assessment Options
■ Collect and assess the answers to the Analysis and
Conclusion questions.
■ Use Assessment Checklist 2: Laboratory Report from
Appendix A if you want your students to generate a full lab
report for this activity.
Figure 11.14
Student Textbook page 376
The membrane is depolarized and the neuron is in its
refractory period. The neuron will not be able to fire again
until the –70 mV resting potential is reestablished.
Repolarization is the event that helps to restore the resting
membrane potential.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 377
Q11. Depolarization of the neuron takes place if the stimulus
is weak. In this case only a small number of channels
will open and some sodium will start to diffuse down
its concentration gradient and into the neuron. This
process changes the membrane potential, causing
depolarization of the membrane. If the charge inside
the cell stays close to –70 mV; however, no impulse will
be generated.
An action potential is a wave of depolarization that
sweeps along the neuron. If a threshold potential is
reached, large numbers of sodium ion channels
simultaneously open, allowing for an influx of sodium
ions and rapid depolarization of the membrane. This
rapid change in the membrane potential from –70 mV
to about +35 mV initiates a nerve impulse, called an
action potential. 
Q12. An action potential has an all-or-none response. Each
depolarization event either reaches the threshold
potential, causing an action potential, or does not.
Furthermore, an action potential has only one strength
or magnitude. In other words, the axon cannot fire a
stronger or weaker action potential.
Q13. Immediately after the sodium ion channels open, the
change in membrane potential to +35 mV triggers
certain potassium ion channels to open. The potassium
ions rush out of the membrane, down their
concentration gradient to the outside of the neuron. This
event, which helps to restore the resting membrane
potential, is called repolarization. 
When the neuron begins to repolarize, the sodium-
potassium pump is reactivated. Once again, sodium ions
are pumped out of the neuron. In addition, ion-specific
channels open, allowing chloride to diffuse into the cell.
The combination of sodium and potassium ions on the
outside of the neural membrane and chloride ions on
the inside causes a rapid drop in membrane potential
from +35 mV to –90 mV . The drop in membrane
potential below resting membrane potential is called
hyperpolarization. 
The voltage-activated potassium ion channels then close,
and the membrane returns to its resting state of –70 mV .
The return to resting membrane potential following the
initial depolarization is called the refractory period.
Until the neuron goes through the refractory period, it
cannot be stimulated again.
Biology File: Web Link
Student Textbook page 378
Animations of an action potential spreading along the axon of
a neuron look like a wave spreading out when a pebble is
dropped in a puddle of water. 
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 380
Q14. A neural impulse is the movement of action potentials
and the consequent repolarization along the neuron. The
impulse begins as a movement of ions across a localized