area of the cell membrane, which reverses the polarity of
the membrane potential in the area. This reversal of
polarity results in depolarization in the neighbouring
area of the membrane, which has the same effect on the
next area of the membrane, and so on. In this way, the
impulse propagates in one direction along the length of
the neuron, with sodium ion channels and then
potassium ion channels opening up in one area after
another.
Q15. An action potential travels the length of the axon until it
reaches the far end, called the synaptic terminal.
Synaptic vesicles move toward and fuse with the
presynaptic membrane. Neurotransmitters are released
into the synaptic cleft and diffuse across the cleft to the
postsynaptic membrane where they bind to receptor
proteins and affect the postsynaptic neuron. 
Q16. Neurotransmitters carry the neural signal from one
neuron to another. Neurotransmitters can also carry the
neural signal from a neuron to an effector, such as a
gland or a muscle fibre.
Biology File: Web Link
Student Textbook page 380
When an action potential arrives at the end of a presynaptic
neuron, the impulse causes sacs that contain neurotransmitters
to fuse with the cell membrane of the axon. These sacs, called
synaptic vesicles, release their contents into the synaptic cleft
by exocytosis. Upon reaching the postsynaptic membrane, the
neurotransmitters bind to specific receptor proteins in this
membrane.
Investigation 11.C: Examining Neural 
Tissue
Student Textbook page 381
Purpose
Students will observe neurons and neuromuscular junctions
with a microscope, identify the principal structures in
different types of neurons, and relate these structures to their
functions.
Outcome
■ 30-A1.2s
Advance Preparation
Time Required
45 minutes
Helpful Tips
■ T o reduce the number of microscopes and prepared slides,
arrange your students into teams of 3. Set up the
microscopes in “stations.” Have an instruction card at each
station that outlines what the students should be looking
for in each slide. While one student is actually looking at
the slide, the other two can be working on their drawings
and answering the question. Use a stop watch or egg timer
to let students know when it is time to move to the next
station. 
■ A number of sites on the Internet show labelled histology
slides of neurological tissue. Web links related to this
activity can be found at www.albertabiology.ca. Select
Student Edition and follow the links to Chapter 11.
Arrange for a computer in your classroom to be connected
to the Internet. Use a data projector to display each image
on the screen or white board. Point out the key structures
on each slide and then have your students complete the
Analysis questions.
■ Review the proper procedure for focussing a microscope.
This will reduce the likelihood that students will damage
the objective lens of the microscopes or break the prepared
slides.
■ Group students into teams of 3 or 4 and assign each group
one of the neural tissues shown in this activity. Have the
teams prepare drawings and detailed answers to their
respective Analysis question. Provide time for each group
to present the results of its research to the rest of the class.
Answers to Analysis Questions
1. Students’ drawings will likely show a difference in colour
(grey vs. white). Grey matter is a category of nervous
Materials
■ microscope
■ prepared neural slides of the following:
■  cross section of brain showing white and grey matter
■  cross section of a nerve showing that a number of neurons
make up a single nerve
■  cross section of the spinal cord showing a sensory neuron, a
motor neuron, and the interneuron
■  unmyelinated neurons showing the dendrites, cell body, and
axon
■  myelinated axons 
■  neuromuscular junction
When to Begin What to Do
1 day before ■ Photocopy BLM 11.1.14
Investigation 11.C
When to Begin What to Do
3 to 4 weeks before ■ Check supply of prepared
microscope slides and
order those required to
complete the activity.
5-24 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems