5-29Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR
■ Consider asking your students to design and create a
computer presentation on the human brain that describes
the different regions and their respective functions.
■ A number of overhead masters and reinforcement tools,
such as handouts that can be used as worksheets, have
been prepared for this section. These are in addition to the
BLMs supporting activities in the section. You will find
them with the Chapter 11 BLMs on the CD that
accompanies this T eacher’s Resource or at
www.albertabiology.ca, after logging on to the Instructor
Edition at the Online Learning Centre.
Number (Type)
11.2.1 (OH) Cross-section of a Human Brain
11.2.2 (HAND) The Spinal Cord
11.2.2A (ANS/OH) The Spinal Cord Answer Key
11.2.3 (HAND) The Structure of the Human Brain
11.2.3A (ANS/OH) The Structure of the Human Brain
Answer Key
11.2.4 (HAND) Protection for the Brain
11.2.4A (ANS/OH) Protection for the Brain Answer Key
11.2.5 (HAND) The Cerebral Cortex
11.2.5A (ANS/OH) The Cerebral Cortex Answer Key
11.2.6 (OH) Map of the Motor Cortex
■ Struggling learners may grasp an idea better by looking at
diagrams or pictures. Use the various blackline masters provided
in this Teacher’s Resource to help these students.
■ Locate the web resources provided on the McGraw-Hill web site
(described under Helpful Resources in this Teacher’s Resource).
These web sites include information on the brain and spinal
cord. Provide a list of these URLs to your students for individual
study at home or in the library.
■ Create a 2- or 3-page study guide of ideas in the section. This
guide can be of great assistance to students who struggle with
print materials, lectures, or even organization of information. The
digest could be in paragraph form, point form, a graphic
organizer, or a combination. It might also spotlight key
vocabulary and provide essential questions that the section is
designed to address. Advanced students could be encouraged
to make a digital version of this guide using presentation
software. 
■ Making models of the human brain can help all students
visualize the different regions of the brain and their respective
functions.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 389
Q19. The spinal cord and the brain make up the central nervous
system, where sensory information is received and motor
control is initiated. The central nervous system (brain and
spinal cord) receives information from the senses, evaluates
this information, and initiates outgoing responses to the
body. The spinal cord is a column of nerve tissue that
extends out of the skull from the brain and downward
through a canal within the backbone. The spinal cord
serves as a means of communication between the brain and
the peripheral nervous system. The spinal cord is also a
centre for reflex actions. The brain maintains homeostasis
within the body: the brain processes information
transmitted through the senses so the body can deal with
changes in the external and internal environment. The
brain is also responsible for reasoning, learning, memory,
language, and speech. 
Q20.The meninges protect the CNS by preventing the direct
circulation of blood through the cells of the brain and spinal
cord. The blood-brain barrier both protects the brain and
supplies the brain with nutrients and oxygen. The blood
capillaries that lead to the brain are made up of tightly fused
epithelial cells. Thus, the capillary walls form a barrier that
blocks many toxins and infectious agents. Some substances,
such as glucose and oxygen, can still pass through the barrier
using special transport mechanisms. Other lipid-soluble
substances are able to pass directly through the lipid bilayer
of the cell membrane. Circulating throughout the spaces, or
ventricles, within the brain and spinal cord is the
cerebrospinal fluid. It circulates between two layers of the
meninges, the arachnoid and pia mater, and acts as a shock
absorber to cushion the brain.
Q21. The hypothalamus helps to maintain homeostasis by:
■  controlling blood pressure
■  controlling heart rate
■  controlling body temperature
■  coordinating the actions of the pituitary gland, by
producing and regulating the release of many
hormones that maintain homeostasis.
The medulla oblongata regulates involuntary actions
such as heart rate, constriction or dilation of blood
vessels to control blood pressure, and rate and depth of
breathing.
Q22. The following chart can be used to summarize the
information required to answer this question.
Region Structure Function
hindbrain cerebellum ■ unconscious control of posture,
reflexes, and body movements
■ control of fine, voluntary motor
skills
■ receives information from
specialized sensors