and masking tape. T est each group’s knowledge of the
structures and the functions of the brain while the other
students are working on the Section 11.2 Review
questions.
Figure 11.32
Student Textbook page 394
■ Hearing is associated with the temporal lobe.
■ Seeing is associated with the occipital lobe.
■ Speaking is associated with the frontal lobe.
■ Thinking is associated with the frontal lobe.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 394
Q26. Scientists first learned about brain functions by studying
the brains of people with brain injuries or diseases. For
example, injured soldiers would sometimes have damage
to certain areas of the brain, but still survive. Researchers
could then link the injured area of the brain to loss of
functions in other areas of the body. Brain mapping, or
operating on the brain of a conscious person, was one
way to determine the function of different regions of the
cerebral cortex. 
Q27. PET can show different levels of activity in the brain,
and can be used to diagnose conditions such as a stroke
or Alzheimer’s disease, in which the deterioration of the
brain leads to memory loss, confusion, and eventual lack
of conscious movement. Because active areas of the brain
have higher energy demands, radioactively labelled
glucose fed to patients shows up on a screen as different
colours representing different activity levels in the brain. 
MRI can produce very clear and detailed images of brain
structure, and can be used to identify various brain
disorders, such as brain tumours. A giant magnet
surrounds the patient’s head, and changes in the
direction of the magnetic field induce hydrogen atoms
in the brain to emit radio signals. These signals can then
be detected, translated, and displayed as a structural or
functional image. 
Biology File: Web Link
Student Textbook page 395
Students’ answers should cite the particular part or parts of
the brain and link the loss of function to their knowledge of
the part of the brain. Information on current research should
be related to the part of the brain and its function. Students
could be encouraged to go beyond the high-profile disorders
of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases.
Students should use more than one source for their
research and include appropriate documentation. This task
can be expanded to include a discussion of how to evaluate
reputable sites. Findings could be summarized in a
comparison chart or spreadsheet to help students evaluate the
sources, with a summary paragraph on areas of agreement and
disagreement. Students could be asked to offer opinions on
the areas of disagreement.
Good sources to begin the exercise are the Mayo Clinic
(students can look under disorders), WebMD, and perhaps a
non-profit organization designed to support those who have
the disease. Beyond simply being able to find information on
the Internet, students can be coached on the importance of
evaluating that information, particularly when it is related to
health issues.
Section 11.2: Review Answers
Student Textbook page 395
1. Scientists estimate that there are more neurons in the
human brain than stars in the Milky Way Galaxy. The
brain therefore requires a constant supply of nutrients and
oxygen to feed these cells. In fact, the brain, which
comprises only 2% of the body’s total weight, uses at least
20% of the body’s oxygen and energy supplies. If the
oxygen supply to the brain is disrupted for even a few
minutes, massive damage can occur in the brain. One
function that requires nutrients and oxygen is the
transmission of nerve impulses, which requires ATP in
order to establish the resting membrane potential (see
Section 11.1 of the student textbook). Cellular respiration
is the process that produces ATP for all cells—including
the neurons. Cellular respiration requires a continual
supply of nutrients (glucose) and oxygen. Therefore, in
order to continually supply brain cells with ATP , the brain
must have a continual supply of oxygen and glucose. 
2. The 3 structures that support and protect the central
nervous system are
■  bone—the vertebral column protects the spinal cord;
the skull protects the brain
■  meninges—these layers of tough, elastic tissues are
found in both the spinal cord and brain. The meninges
protect the central nervous system by preventing the
direct circulation of blood through the cells of the brain
and spinal cord.
■  cerebrospinal fluid—the fluid circulates throughout the
spaces within the brain and spinal cord. It acts as a
shock absorber to cushion the brain.
3. Bacterial meningitis is a potentially fatal disease. A doctor
will perform a spinal tap if he/she suspects meningitis. A
spinal tap allows the doctor to withdraw a small amount
of the cerebrospinal fluid and send it to a lab for testing.
Bacterial cultures of the cerebrospinal fluid can be used to
diagnose this disease.
5-33Chapter 11 The Nervous System • MHR