processes. You will find them with the Chapter 11 BLMs
on the CD that accompanies this T eacher’s Resource or at
www.albertabiology.ca, after logging on to the Instructor
Edition at the Online Learning Centre.
Number (Type)
11.1.1 (OH) Organization of the Human Nervous System 
11.1.2 (OH) Neuron Bundles
11.1.3 (HAND) From Sensor to Muscle Action
11.1.3A (ANS/OH) From Sensor to Muscle Action
Answer Key
11.1.4 (HAND) The Reflex Arc
11.1.4A (ANS/OH) The Reflex Arc Answer Key
11.1.6 (HAND) Parts of a Neuron
11.1.6A (ANS/OH) Parts of a Neuron Answer Key
11.1.7 (HAND) Establishing the Resting Membrane
Potential in a Neuron
11.1.7A (ANS/OH) Establishing the Resting Membrane
Potential in a Neuron Answer Key
11.1.9 (HAND) Depolarization and Repolarization of a
Neuron 
11.1.9A (ANS/OH) Depolarization and Repolarization of
a Neuron Answer Key
11.1.10 (HAND) Action Potential
11.1.10A (ANS/OH) Action Potential Answer Key
11.1.11 (HAND) Saltatory Conduction 
11.1.11A (ANS/OH) Saltatory Conduction Answer Key
11.1.12 (HAND) Neural Synapse
11.1.12A (ANS/OH) Neural Synapse Answer Key
11.1.13 (HAND) Neuromuscular Junction
11.1.13A (ANS/OH) Neuromuscular Junction Answer
Key
11.1.15 (AST) Neurotransmitters and Their Functions
Quiz
11.1.15A (ANS) Neurotransmitters and Their Functions
Answer Key
■ The terminology introduced in this section could pose a challenge
for some students, especially those whose first language is not
English. Consider allowing these students to express their ideas
initially in their first language and then translate these ideas into
English.
■ Ask students to start a vocabulary list. Their list should include
the name of a structure, its function, and an illustration. They can
add terms to their list as well as modifying and refining existing
terms as they work through the chapter.
■ Struggling learners may grasp an idea better by looking at
diagrams or pictures. Use the various blackline masters provided
in this Teacher’s Resource to help these students.
■ The rich array of materials available through the Internet makes it
relatively easy to differentiate materials for your students. For
example, ESL students might benefit from making their own
crossword puzzle dealing with the neuron. Or the interactive
nature of many of the recommended web sites could help
students visualize the concepts presented in this section.
■ Create a 2- or 3-page study guide of ideas in the section. This
guide can be of great assistance to students who struggle with
print materials, lectures, or even organization of information. The
guide could be in paragraph form, point form, a graphic organizer,
or a combination. It might also spotlight key vocabulary and
provide essential questions that the section is designed to
address. Advanced students could be encouraged to make a
digital version of this guide using presentation software. 
■ Making models of the neuron as well as the electrochemical
events that take place during the transmission of a nervous
impulse can help all students visualize these concepts.
Figure 11.1
Student Textbook page 366
Students may remember this information from previous
biology classes. Sensory receptors are found throughout every
body organ and tissue. The function of the sensory receptors
is to send nerve impulses to the brain in response to
environmental information (stimuli). When the body’s
temperature begins to drop or rise, specialized receptors in the
skin detect the change and signal the hypothalamus.
The brain, similar to the thermostat in a house, is an
integrator—it sends messages to effectors (analogous to the
furnace or air conditioner in a house). Effectors, in turn, cause
a change in the internal conditions. In this case, the brain
sends messages to various tissues and organs that cause the
body to either generate or conserve heat. These messages can
be transmitted by the nervous system or by chemical
messengers known as hormones.
Answers to Questions for Comprehension
Student Textbook page 367 
Q1. Homeostasis is the maintenance of a constant internal
environment. Slight fluctuations above and below these
“normal” levels are common, so our internal systems are
often said to be in a state of dynamic equilibrium.
Q2. The human nervous system can regulate tens of thousands
of activities simultaneously. Its overall function is to
collect information about the external conditions in
relation to the body’s internal state, to analyze this
information, and to initiate appropriate responses to
maintain homeostasis.
5-18 MHR • Unit 5 The Nervous and Endocrine Systems