Biology 30 Information Bulletin 2025–2026  |  Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment
28
Most of the examination questions are context-based. This means questions are organized into sets related to contexts 
associated with content in the program of studies. A particular context may be used for one or more questions questions.
Context-based questions are necessary to assess the cognitive expectations of the program of studies. Students should expect 
to see some biological contexts that are completely new to them. They can be confident that the knowledge, skills, and attitudes 
they acquired in Biology 30 have prepared them to address these questions.
The diploma exam is composed of questions at all three cognitive levels (R/U, A, and HMA); however, the majority of the 
questions in the examination are at an applying (A) level of cognition, because that is what is required by the program of studies.
All contexts and questions are validated for correctness by scientists with academic expertise in the content areas covered in the 
Biology 30 Program of Studies.
Context-based questions require reading. The number of words in a Biology 30 examination has been tracked over time. The 
number of words in the examination increased with the January 2010 diploma examination, which coincided with the removal of 
the written-response portion. Since January 2010, however, the number of words has remained consistent.
The order of questions in a diploma examination typically follows the order of units in the program of studies; however, a question 
could appear on the examination within another unit if the context relates to outcomes in more than one unit.
Questions that require skill in applying scientific processes and questions that require STS connections are distributed 
throughout the examination.
The digital format of the Biology 30 Diploma Examination  consists of 60 questions worth 1 mark each. The questions are 
comprised of various types, including multiple-choice questions, supported by the new digital assessment platform.
The paper format of the Biology 30 Diploma Examination  consists of 48 multiple-choice and 12 numerical-response questions 
worth 1 mark each. 
Multiple-choice questions  are of two types: discrete and context dependent. A discrete question stands on its own without 
any additional directions or information. It may take the form of a question or an incomplete statement. A context-dependent 
question provides information that is separate from the question stem.
Most of the multiple-choice questions in the diploma examination are context dependent. If a context is provided on the diploma 
examination, then a student cannot properly address the question without reading the context. Students need to read contexts 
carefully.
Numerical-response questions  are of several types, including these: calculating numerical values; expressing ratios; selecting 
structures, functions, or statements from a diagram or a list; matching structures, functions, or statements from a diagram or 
a list; and determining the sequence of listed events.
Specific instructions for recording answers for each type of numerical-response question are provided in the instructions 
pages of each Biology 30 Diploma Examination  and with each question. Students are advised to pay close attention to specific 
instructions included with each question for recording answers on the answer sheet.