Field Testing
Field testing is an essential stage in the development of fair, valid, and reliable provincial examinations. Field testing is a process 
of collecting data on questions before the questions become part of a diploma examination. Potential diploma examination 
questions are administered to students in field tests for diploma courses throughout the province to determine the difficulty and 
appropriateness of the questions. Each field test requires a large student sample to provide the examination developers with 
reliable information (i.e., statistical data and written validation comments from teachers and students).
How do field tests help teachers and students?
Teachers receive each student’s score promptly, gaining useful information about their students’ performance. Students benefit 
from writing a test that duplicates some of the experience of writing a diploma examination. Field tests provide students and 
teachers with examples of the format and content of questions that may appear on diploma examinations. Finally, because of 
field testing, students, teachers, and parents can be reassured that the questions on diploma examinations have undergone 
a rigorous development, improvement, and validation process.
How are field-test data used?
The data received from field tests indicate the validity, reliability, and fairness of each question. Questions that meet specific 
standards are selected for use on future diploma examinations.
Some questions or sets of questions may not initially perform as well as we require. These questions may be revised and tested 
again in field tests. Revisions are influenced by the written comments of students and teachers, who provide valuable advice 
about the appropriateness of the questions, the adequacy of writing-time limits, test length, text readability, artwork/graphics 
clarity and suitability, and question difficulty.
Science field tests
Science field tests are available in digital format on the digital assessment platform.
Students may use paper data booklets or data pages for all science field tests. These resources will also appear in the digital 
assessment platform. Students should have scrap paper, which may be accessed in the “Forms” section on the Administering 
diploma exams web page. All paper data sheets and scrap paper with markings must be securely shredded at the end of the 
field-test administration. 
Teachers are provided with data on how their students performed. Test items address learning outcomes in the program of 
studies, which allows teachers to use field-test results to learn more about their students’ strengths and areas for improvement. 
The security of field-test items remains vital to the administration of diploma examinations. Participating teachers must commit to 
maintaining the security of field-test items.
More information about field-test registration deadlines, administration, and security is available in the Field Testing Guide 
2025–2026 on the Teacher participation in provincial assessments web page.
Biology 30 Information Bulletin 2025–2026  |  Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment
6