Examination Security
All diploma examinations will be held secure until they are released to the public by the Minister. No secure diploma examination 
is to be viewed until it is released to the public by the Minister. No secure diploma examination is to be previewed, discussed, 
copied, or removed from the room in which the examination is being written. However, for the January and June administrations 
only, teachers will be allowed access to a teacher perusal copy for review purposes 1 hour after the examination has started.
For mathematics and science diploma examinations, all diploma examinations must be kept secure before, during, and after 
administration, without exception.
For humanities diploma examinations, the humanities Part A: Written Response examinations in the January and June 
administrations must be kept secure until after they are administered. All other humanities Part A: Written Response 
examinations, and all humanities Part B examinations, must be kept secure before, during, and after administration, without 
exception.
Unused copies of all secured diploma examinations must be returned to Alberta Education and Childcare and Childcare as per 
the dates indicated in the Significant Dates at-a-Glance  resource.
For more information about teacher perusal copies and examination security, please refer to the Administering diploma exams  
web page.
Time Limits on Diploma Examinations
All students may use extra time to write diploma examinations. This means that all students have up to 6 hours to complete the 
Biology 30 Diploma Examination, if they need it. The examination is nevertheless designed so that the majority of students can 
complete it within 3 hours. The examination instructions state both the designed time and the total time allowed.
Although extra time is allowed for diploma examinations in all subjects, the total time allowed is not the same in all subjects.  
For more information about accommodations and provisions for students, please refer to the Administering diploma exams 
web page. 
Biology 30 Information Bulletin 2025–2026  |  Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment
2