Biology 30 Information Bulletin 2025–2026  |  Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment
29
Biology 30 Diploma Examination Instructions Pages: 
Paper Format
Copyright © 2026, the Crown in Right of Alberta, as represented by the Minister of Education and Childcare, 
Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment Sector, 6th floor, 44 Capital Boulevard, 
10044 108 Street NW, Edmonton, Alberta  T5J 5E6, and its licensors. All rights reserved.  
Duplication of this examination in any manner or its use for purposes other than those authorized and scheduled  
by Alberta Education and Childcare is strictly prohibited.
The personal information collected through the Diploma Examinations Program is for the purpose of administering 
the program as well as support programs, policy evaluation, and measurement. This collection is authorized by  
section 4(c) of the Protection of Privacy Act. For questions about the collection of personal information,  
contact the Director, Diploma Programs, Provincial Assessment Sector, System Excellence, by email at  
Diploma.Exams@gov.ab.ca or by mail to 6th floor, 44 Capital Boulevard, 10044 108 Street NW, Edmonton, 
Alberta  T5J 5E6. 
Biology 30
Grade 12 Diploma Examination
Description
Time: 3 hours. This closed-book examination 
was developed to be completed in 3 hours; 
however, you may take up to 6 hours to 
complete the examination, should you need it.
This examination consists of 48 multiple-
choice and 12 numerical-response questions, 
of equal value.
This examination contains sets of related 
questions. A set of questions may contain 
multiple-choice and/or numerical-response 
questions.
Tear-out data pages are included near the back 
of this booklet.
 • Use only an HB pencil for the answer sheet.
 • Fill in the information on the back cover 
of the examination booklet and the answer 
sheet as directed by the presiding examiner.
 • You may use one approved calculator:  
either a scientific calculator that does not 
have prohibited properties or a graphing 
calculator approved by Alberta Education 
and Childcare.
 • You must have cleared your calculator 
of all information that is stored in the 
programmable or parametric memory.
 • You may use a ruler and a protractor.
 • Read each question carefully.
 • Consider all numbers used in the  
examination to be the result of 
a measurement or an observation.
 • If you wish to change an answer, erase  
all traces of your first answer.
 • Do not fold the answer sheet.
 • The presiding examiner will collect your 
answer sheet and examination booklet 
and send them to Alberta Education and 
Childcare.
 • Now read the detailed instructions for 
answering machine-scored questions.
Instructions
 • Turn to the last page of the examination 
booklet. Carefully fold and tear out the 
machine-scored answer sheet along 
the perforation.
Note: Additional tear‑out pages at the back  
of this booklet may be used for your rough 
work. No marks will be given for work done 
on the tear‑out pages.