Biology 30 Information Bulletin 2025–2026  |  Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment
8
Biology 30 Field Testing
All Biology 30 field tests are offered in a digital format, and two different types are available: end-of-course field tests, and 
unit field tests. 
End-of-course field tests have questions related to outcomes in all four units of the program of studies, and unit field tests have 
questions related to outcomes in one single unit.
The following table summarizes the format, number of questions, and length of time for the various field tests available for the 
2025–2026 school year. Teachers may wish to consider this table when requesting a field test placement.
Unit Tests End-of-course Tests
Number of questions
(MC and NR)
20–25 20–25 30–35
Test time (min) 50* 50* 65*
Program of studies 
coverage
Unit A: Nervous and 
Endocrine Systems
Unit B: Reproduction 
and Development
Unit C: Cell Division, 
Genetics, and 
Molecular Biology
Unit D: Populations 
and Communities
All four units
* The field tests are designed to be completed in 65 minutes; however, an additional 
15 minutes may be used, if available. These time instructions appear on the field test 
instructions pages.
Each unit field test is designed to take 50 minutes of writing time and has approximately 20 to 25 questions. As a result, the 
entire unit may not be covered on a particular unit test.
End-of-course field tests are available in two different lengths: one that takes 50 minutes of writing time, and one that takes 
65 minutes of writing time.
For all field tests, an additional 10 minutes of administration time is required for each field-test administration period. Therefore, 
a class in which a Biology 30 field test is to be administered should be a minimum of 60 minutes.
If your class periods are shorter than the total time required but you would like your students to participate in field testing, you 
can still request a field test provided arrangements can be made in the school to give students an appropriate amount of time for 
the field test.
Field tests can be scheduled either within class time or outside class time up to the day before the Biology 30 Diploma 
Examination.
For information about how to schedule and administer a field test, please refer to the Field Testing Guide 2025–2026  on the 
Teacher participation in provincial assessments web page or contact Field.Test@gov.ab.ca .
Detailed instructions for how to schedule a field test can also be found on the digital assessment platform Help  web page.