Biology 30 Information Bulletin 2025–2026  |  Alberta Education and Childcare, Provincial Assessment
25
Performance Expectations
Curriculum standards
Provincial performance standards help to communicate what students must be able to do to achieve the objectives specified 
in the Biology 30 Program of Studies. The specific statements of standards are written primarily to help Biology 30 teachers 
understand the extent to which students must know the required content and demonstrate the required skills in order to pass 
the examination.
Diploma exams are designed to match the program of studies of each subject, but what the diploma exams measure may not 
be the same in scope as what teachers measure. Diploma exam marks and teacher-awarded marks should reflect the same 
standard, however, because both assess students based on the same program of studies (curriculum). Alberta Education and 
Childcare works with teachers to set and maintain the standards of achievement for diploma exams. This information bulletin is 
intended to assist teachers in understanding the provincial standards for Biology 30.
Acceptable standard
Students who achieve the acceptable standard in Biology 30 will receive a final course mark of 50% or higher. Students who 
achieve the acceptable standard demonstrate a basic understanding of the nature of scientific inquiry by performing, observing, 
and interpreting simple investigations. They can readily interpret data that are represented in simple graphs and tables and can 
translate symbolic representations into written descriptions. These students are able to identify structures on diagrams and 
describe their functions, and they are able to recognize and provide definitions for simple biological terms. They demonstrate a 
basic understanding of equilibrium and the control of homeostasis in the human body. They solve simple, quantitative genetics 
and ecology problems. These students can apply their understanding of some key biological concepts and technologies to 
straightforward but novel contexts. They can interpret information in new contexts to identify scientific, technological, and 
societal components of biological issues.
Standard of excellence
Students who achieve the standard of excellence in Biology 30 will receive a final course mark of 80% or higher. In addition to 
meeting the expectations for the acceptable standard of performance, these students also demonstrate with confidence their 
aptitude and interest in biology. They design, analyze, and evaluate experimental designs. They readily interpret interrelated sets 
of data such as complex diagrams, graphs, and tables. These students provide specific and comprehensive explanations of 
concepts. They are able to integrate and apply their knowledge of biology to new and different contexts. They simultaneously 
apply two or more biological concepts that cross major themes. They demonstrate a thorough understanding of quantitative 
relationships and solve multistep numerical problems. They analyze complex and unique issues, including those related to 
current research. These students are aware of various viewpoints relating to a variety of issues and perspectives in the field of 
science and technology.
For more details on the relationship between the program of studies and performance standards, see the Biology 30 
Student-based Performance Standards , a support document available on the Writing diploma exams  web page. The 
student-based performance standards document provides examples of some behaviours exhibited by students at the 
acceptable standard and at the standard of excellence. It should be used in conjunction with the program of studies, as it is not 
intended to replace the program of studies. 