Polygraph Testing & Forensic Document Analysis
A typical polygraph examination room.
In the following lessons you will:
examine some of the structures of the nervous system that control the stress responses that occur when a person is being deceptive. You will be introduced to the history and basic mechanics of the polygraph instrument.
discusse the details of an actual polygraph test and how these tests are used in criminal matters.
focus upon the details of forensic document analysis and how this technique is used in policing.
examine the details of two historical crime cases and one fictional crime case involving polygraph testing and forensic writing analysis.
When a person is being deceptive and telling a lie - no matter age or gender - certain universal physiological stress responses are triggered in the body. This fact led to the development of a forensic instrument that detects and monitors these physiological responses. The instrument developed is called the polygraph, but it has commonly become known as the lie detector.
Forensic document analysis involves the examination of documents for which the source or authenticity is in doubt. The most common types of documents that are analyzed by forensic experts include letters, cheques, drivers licenses, contracts, wills, passports, and lottery tickets. Verifying a questionable document may involve a visual examination (human-eye and/or microscope) and/or chemical analysis (chromatography).
By the end of Module 6, you should be able to
understand the process of polygraph testing by identifying the major physiological signs of the sympathetic nervous system response to stress
outline when polygraph testing is useful and when polygraph testing is not useful
describe some of the document analysis techniques that can be used, such as handwriting analysis, chromatography, and suspect document profiling to identify unknown documents
analyze a famous criminal case that involves forensic document analysis
"Guilt always carries fear around with it. There is a tremor in the blood of a thief, that if attended to, would effectually discover him."
- Daniel Defoe (English novelist, 1730.)
