The Components of BloodRed Blood CellsBlood is the most common evidence found after a violent crime or a serious motor vehicle accident. It may be found at the crime scene, it may be found on the perpetrator, it may be found onthe victim, or it may be found in more than one of these locations.An average human adult has about five litres of blood in the circulatory system. Blood is a complex fluid that has four components, which from largest to smallest quantity are as follows:Plasma - fluid portion of blood; comprised mainly of water, dissolved nutrients, minerals and gases; makes up 55% of bloodRed Blood Cells - specialized cells designed to attach to oxygen and carbon dioxide; also known as erythrocytesWhite Blood Cells - specialized cells that focus upon the destruction of foreign antigens; have a nucleus and thus are the cells obtained for DNA analysis, a useful tool in forensic scienceThrombocytes - specialized cells involved in the clotting of blood; prevent excessive bleedingBlood Flow during StressDuring most violent crimes and motor vehicle accidents, the body of every individual involved is in a state of stress. The stressed body responds by increasing the heart rate. This leads to increased blood flow or blood pressure. Therefore, if any blood vessels are damaged when an individual is under stress, a significant amount of blood is released. At a suspected crime scene, forensic investigators check for both blood as well as materials that may have been used to clean up any blood.Red Blood Cell Count and ElevationA healthy male has about 5.4 million red blood cells per cubic millimetre of blood; a female has 4.8 million per cubic millimetre of blood. An average adult has an average of 25 trillion red blood cells! After about 120 days, a red blood cell becomes weak and nonfunctional. These old red blood cells are broken down by the spleen, liver, and bone marrow.Under low oxygen conditions at high elevations, the human body produces a greater number of red blood cells. Therefore, it is possible for forensic scientists to estimate the elevation of the location at which an individual was simply by looking at their red blood cell count. For example, Calgary is at a higher elevation (1033 m) than Edmonton (689 m). As a result, an individual who has been in Calgary longer than 5 days has a higher red blood cell count than an individual from Edmonton. Thus, a forensic scientist with a microscope may use this difference to discern the approximate geographic location for an individual.Determining the Organism that Blood Comes fromA light microscope may be used to determine if a blood sample from a crime scene is human and not animal. A red blood cell of birds, reptiles, and lower vertebrates (i.e., birds, frogs, toads) have a nucleus (see figure A). Mature red blood cells in humans and other mammals are anucleated -- they have no nucleus (see figure B). Having anucleated red blood cells is considered an advanced evolutionarily trait because these red blood cells can carry more oxygen than nucleated cells due to a higher concentration of hemoglobin.
Figure A: Microscopic photo of red blood cells from a tadpole.
Figure B: Microscopic image of red blood cells from a human.
Therefore, if a microscopic blood sample has a-nucleated red blood cells, the blood came from either a human or from another mammal (such as dogs, cats. etc.). After the possibility of the blood coming from a mammal has been ruled out, further tests can be done to try to individualize the sample (i.e., DNA print analysis).When you are ready, please continue to the next page to learn more about blood.
