What is a Rape Kit?
Soon after a victim has reported a sexual assault, police take the victim to a local hospital for medical examination. A specially trained physician and/or nurse follow certain specialized procedures using commonly referred to as a ‘rape kit’. During a ‘rape kit’ examination, the nurse will collect as much biological material (that is, semen, blood, skin, head hair, pubic hair) as possible from the victim’s body.
The areas of the victim’s body that are focused upon during a rape kit examination include clothing, skin surface, fingernails, pubic hair, vulva (external genitalia), vagina (internal genitalia), and the rectum. This examination is obviously not a pleasant experience for the already traumatized victim; however, the evidence that can be obtained from a rape kit can help lead to the apprehension of the perpetrator responsible for this violent crime.
The biological materials obtained from a rape kit that are of particular interest to the forensic investigator are foreign materials left behind by the perpetrator of the sexual assault. After any foreign biological materials have been collected, the evidence is transferred to a DNA analysis laboratory for a DNA profile (also called a DNA fingerprint). In Canada, DNA analysis for all police departments is conducted by five RCMP laboratories across the country (Vancouver, Regina, Winnipeg, Ottawa, Halifax). After a DNA profile match is made, there is definitive proof that a particular individual was involved in the sexual assault.
Backlog in the Analysis of Rape Kits
Like many scientific procedures, completing a DNA analysis of a rape kit is expensive ($1000.00 per kit).  This cost factor, in addition to the vast number of rape kits that exist has resulted in a backlog in the testing of rape kits across North America.
The completion of a DNA analysis of a rape kit is time-consuming and expensive because it must be done by a highly trained forensic expert. Becoming a DNA analysis expert takes a minimum of six years of education; consequently, few of these skilled scientists are available. Only DNA from body fluid evidence from the most serious violent crimes (homicide, man slaughter, sexual assault) is analyzed because of the relative small numbers of DNA analysts. Due to the increased volume of specimens sent in for analysis, a backlog in the completion of DNA analysis of rape kits in Canada (and across the world) exists.
The DNA analysis backlog came to attention of the Canadian public after a judicial inquiry into the Paul Bernardo murder case in Ontario in 1996. The inquiry found that the DNA analysis of several rape kits took over two years to complete, during which time Paul Bernardo committed four more sexual assaults and two murders. Shortly after the DNA analysis was finally completed, Bernardo was arrested and charged with several counts of sexual assault and two counts of first-degree murder. This case clearly illustrates the detrimental impact that the slow response time for DNA analysis can have. The judicial recommendation that came from this inquiry was that all DNA analysis tests for the purpose of criminal investigations should be completed within 30 days.
This DNA analysis backlog issue was considered so serious that the Office of the Auditor General of Canada conducted an investigation of all six of the RCMP crime laboratories in 1999. Some information revealed after this investigation included:
The average turnaround time for DNA analysis by RCMP laboratories was 101 days.
The RCMP completed only 15 percent of its DNA cases within 30 days.
As of October 1999, the DNA analysis backlog was 633 cases.
Wide variations in workload contribute to the DNA analysis backlog. One laboratory had an average backlog of 28 cases per scientist, while another had 13 cases per scientist.
The comments about the DNA analysis backlog put forward in the Auditor General’s report were quite critical:
“DNA technology is a very useful tool for police investigations. However, delays in obtaining results slow police investigations and hamper the ability to eliminate suspects and make arrests quickly. Most important, delays in reporting DNA results endanger public safety because criminals have more opportunity to reoffend.”
In 2001, the RCMP used a private firm to analyze DNA crime scene samples to lower the DNA analysis backlog and speed up the completion of tests being submitted. However, the backlog continues. At the end of 2004, five years after the Auditor General’s report was released, a DNA analysis backlog still existed at the RCMP laboratories across Canada--a backlog of 648 DNA analysis tests. Experts and politicians suggest that lack of adequate funding by the federal and provincial governments and the low numbers of forensic DNA analysis experts are the main reasons for the backlog.
