Finding and Lifting Latent Fingerprints Using Lifting Powders
Using fingerprint lifting powder and lifting fingerprints is a skill requiring practice. When forensic investigators are learning this skill, ‘mock’ lifting powders are often used to prevent the waste of expensive ‘real’ lifting powders. In this experiment, you will be attempting to enhance and lift latent fingerprints using some fairly common household items.
 Purpose: Enhance two latent fingerprints using ‘lifting powder’ and attempt to lift each print from two distinct surfaces.
Materials:
scissors
latex gloves or forceps
clear tape (wide is the best type)
drinking glass and/or window
feather and/or large soft make-up brush
‘lifting powder’ (one of cinnamon, icing sugar, or cornstarch)
Procedure:
‘Oil’ one of your fingers by rubbing it on your forehead or on the side of your nose.
Place this finger firmly onto the side of drinking glass.
Dip a feather or make-up brush into your lifting powder. Cover the tip of your feather/brush with a substantial amount of lifting powder.
Place the feather/brush slightly above or beside the fingerprint impression you made. Do not touch the print directly. Very gently spread the lifting powder upon the fingerprint by waving the feather/brush above the surface.
The lifting powder should adhere to the fingerprint. If the fingerprint pattern is difficult to see, you likely have applied too much powder. Therefore, gently blow off some excess powder. If this does not work the first time, try it again. This does take practice and patience.
After you can see a definite print pattern, gently place a piece of clear tape on top of the fingerprint. Gently rub the tape to lift the print. Slowly remove the tape and set it aside.
Create a second fingerprint by repeating steps 1 to 6. However, this time place the print upon a different object such as a window, desk, book, or wall. (You may wish to try other surfaces either now or later.)
After you have lifted both prints, clean up your area, and answer the related questions.
Related questions (note that this does not have to be submitted for marks):
Are you able to actually see and identify a fingerprint pattern after this procedure?
a) Explain why or why not. b) Describe the type of print pattern that is visible.
From what type of surface was the print easier to lift? Explain.
Lifting powders are used often by all forensic investigators. Why do you think this technique is so common?
Name three objects upon which lifting powders are likely suitable for gathering fingerprints at a crime scene.
Click here to check your answers.
Did You Know?
Some forensic experts think that ‘lip-prints’ are as unique as fingerprints.
