Behavioural Effects of Alcohol ConsumptionBlood alcohol concentration (BAC) refers to the concentration of alcohol detected in the blood. The BAC of an individual rises within 20 minutes after drinking alcohol. The legal limit in Canada is 80 mg%, which is the equivalent of 80 mg of alcohol in 100 mL of blood (0.08). When an individual is found to have more than 80 mg% of alcohol in their blood, he/she is considered to be legally impaired and can be arrested for impaired driving. Interestingly, however, a police officer can charge you with impaired driving regardless of your BAC.Certain predictable behavioral changes occur when a person drinks alcohol. The body responds to alcohol in stages that correspond to an increase one’s BAC:Euphoria (BAC = 30 to 120mg%)more self-confidentslow reaction timepoor judgmentshortening of attention spanflushed facedifficulty with fine movementsExcitement (BAC = 90 to 250mg%)drowsinessdifficulties understanding or rememberingincreasingly slower reaction timepoor coordination and loss of balanceblurred visionConfusion (BAC = 180 to 300mg%)confusion; dizziness and perhaps staggering; cannot see clearlyhighly emotional--aggressive, withdrawn, or overly affectionateslurred speech; uncoordinated movements; high pain toleranceStupor (BAC = 250 to 400mg%)hardly move at all; cannot respond to stimuli; cannot stand or walkvomiting; lapses in and out of consciousnessComa (BAC = 350 to 500mg%)unconscious; reflexes are depressed (for example, pupils do not respond).breathing slow /shallow; lower than normal body temperature; heart rate may slow.Death (BAC more than 500mg%)death by alcohol poisoningAn Alberta Impaired Driving TragedyIn November,1996, a married couple from Camrose, Alberta, were killed in a collision with an impaired driver. The couple left behind four children under the age of twelve. The impaired driver had been charged with impaired driving before; however, he did not lose his license and continued to drive. In court following killing the couple from Camrose, in a plea bargain he received a 3-year prison sentence and 10 years driving prohibition. Shattered Lives and Broken HeartsOn October 24th, Joann Christou, 50, was killed by 21 year old Eric Lestar when he drove his car into the back of her vehicle.  Lestar, after drinking 2-1/2 pints at a bar, sped through a yellow light at 97 Street and 160 Avenue during busy afternoon rush-hour traffic. His Infiniti G37 struck the back of Christou’s Nissan, sending the Xterra rolling into a ditch. His car also ended up in the ditch. Christou’s vehicle burst into flames. Bystanders and police tried to save her. One witness reported seeing her hit her head on the vehicle’s steering wheel. Multiple people heard her screaming as the vehicle burned. Investigators determined Lestar’s vehicle was travelling between 116 and 129 km/h in the moments before the collision. The speed limit was 70 km/h. Lestar’s blood alcohol level between 179 to 211 milligrams of alcohol/100 mL of blood — almost three times the legal limit. He was in “good spirits and laughing” as he received medical treatment at the scene. Lestar pleaded guilty to impaired driving causing death. He was sentenced to four years and 3 months in prison.  He is also banned from driving for five years.Sources: http://edmontonjournal.com/news/crime/grieving-family-packs-courtroom-for-drunk-driver-sentencinghttps://globalnews.ca/news/3909559/eric-lestar-sentenced-to-4-years-for-drunk-driving-crash-that-killed-joann-christou/“Alcohol is the leading contributor to deaths on highways. Over 35,000 deaths involving a drinking driver occurred between 1977 and 1996, and the number injured may have been over 1,000,000. It has been estimated that a 50 mg% legal limit could reduce the total motor vehicle fatalities between 6% and 15%. ”- Dr. Robert Mann, Senior Scientist at Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
