Sexual Assault Crimes
One of the most disturbing crimes that can occur involves a person being forced to engage in sexual activity against their will. The majority of all sex-related crimes (ie. rape/sexual assault, molestation, pedophilia and other indecent acts) are committed by men. Thus, forensic investigators look for semen left behind by a suspect during the investigation of sex-related crimes. Semen can prove to be especially useful if the male suspect involved is a secretor.
What is a Secretor?
There are body fluids and tissues other than blood which may be left at a crime scene that can prove useful to forensic investigators.  These include: muscle tissue, skin, saliva, semen, sweat, tears and vaginal secretions.
Approximately 80% of the North Americans are known as secretors. In a person who is a secretor the antigens, antibodies, proteins, and enzymes in their blood are also present in their other body fluids and body tissues. Recall that red blood cells have protein-markers on their surface which determine a person's blood type.  Therefore, the same anti-serum test that is used for the blood to identify type A, B, AB, or O blood types can be used on a secretor’s body tissues yielding the same results. An anti-serum test is useful because secretors have the same protein-marker within the cells in their body fluids/tissues as they do in their red blood cells.
If it is determined that a suspect is a secretor then their body fluids can be very useful to help confirm their identity. If the suspect is not a secretor then investigators must find other evidence to help prove guilt.
Disturbing Statistics about Sexual Assault
Sexual assault is one of the most underreported crimes (Benoit et al. 2015; Brennan and Taylor-Butts 2008; Kaufman 2008; Luce et al. 2010). Research has attributed this to a wide range of reasons, including the shame, guilt and stigma of sexual victimization (Johnson 2012; Sable et al. 2006), the normalization of inappropriate or unwanted sexual behaviour, and the perception that sexual violence does not warrant reporting (Benoit et al. 2015).  Of all sexual assault incidents perpetrated by someone other than a spouse, only one in twenty was reported to the police, compared to one in three incidents of other types of crime measured by the General Social Survey on Victimization.
Overall, sexual assault offenders were most often men, acting alone and under the age of 35. Just over half of victims knew the person who sexually assaulted them. Most often, offenders were a friend, acquaintance or neighbour, then a stranger.
According to the General Social Survey on Canadians’ Safety (Victimization), there were 22 incidents of sexual assault for every 1,000 Canadians aged 15 and older in 2014. This represented approximately 636,000 self-reported incidents of sexual assault.
