Introduction
Fingerprints found at a crime scene are important types of evidence because they can help identify the individual or individuals responsible. This lesson focuses on two crime case studies that involve fingerprint evidence: one of the most bizarre unsolved murder mysteries of all time and a fictional bank robbery.
Crime Case Study: The Zodiac Killer
Over 30 years ago, five violent attacks on eight innocent people in the San Francisco Bay area were attributed to a man known as the Zodiac Killer. A bizarre aspect to this case was that after each of the attacks the Zodiac Killer sent letters to police and local newspapers. Over 20 letters were written between 1966 and 1970, all beginning with the greeting, "This is the Zodiac speaking," and all signed with an insignia of a cross over a circle. The letters outlined very specific details about the murders and discussed how the victims were chosen on the basis of their astrological signs. The Zodiac Killer threatened newspapers that, if they did not publish his letters, he would commit more violent attacks such as set a bomb off in school bus filled with children.
The following are descriptions of the Zodiac Killer’s Crimes:
Attack #1: Cheri Jo Bates, age 18 Location: Riverside City College Date: October 30, 1966
Cheri Jo’s dead body was found late one night in a dark alley with her clothes and purse present and intact. The killer disabled the victim’s car and waited for her return. When she arrived, she could not start her car and it is thought that the killer offered her help. After he failed to start the car, he offered her a ride. He then lured her into a driveway between two empty houses, strangled her and then stabbed her numerous times with a small knife.
Attack #2: Betty Lou Jensen, age 16 and David Faraday, age 17 Location: Lake Herman Road Date: December 20, 1968
While two young people were parked just off an isolated road, the killer shot the right rear window and the left rear tire of their car. Investigators discovered that David was killed by a single close-range bullet to the head while standing near the rear of the car. It is believed that he was forced to get out of the car by the killer. Betty Lou’s body was found gunned down 30 feet from the car and investigators believe she tried to run away, perhaps while David was being killed.
Attack #3: Darlene Ferrin, age 22 and Mike Mageau, age 19 Location: Blue Rock Springs Golf Course parking lot Date: July 5, 1969
A man carrying a flashlight approached a young couple in their parked car. When the man reached the passenger side of the car, he fired a handgun five times through the passenger window. Mike and Darlene were both hit several times at close range. After the man walked back to his car, Mike began to yell in pain. The killer then returned to the car and fired two more shots into each of the victims. Darlene died in the ambulance on the way to the hospital; Mike survived after hours of surgery.
Attack #4: Cecelia Shepard, age 22 and Bryan Hartnell, age 20 Location: Twin Oak Ridge Lake Date: September 27, 1969
While two young people were having a picnic, an unknown man approached them . Just before reaching them, the man put on a black hood that covered his face and upper body. Embroidered on his hood was the cross-circle design the Zodiac Killer had used to sign his letters. Then, he pulled out a handgun and demanded money and the car keys. He stated that he was an escaped convict on the run. He then tied the victims and stabbed them each several times with a large knife. Using a black marker, the man wrote the cross-circle logo and the date on the door of the victims’ car. Cecelia died at the scene; Bryan survived after hours of surgery.
Attack #5: Paul Stine, age 29 Location: San Francisco City Date: October 11, 1969
A cab driver was shot in the right side of the head at close range. The killer removed Paul’s wallet and keys. He then cut a large piece from Paul’s shirt and took it with him. Three teens who were across the street from the cab saw the killer as he cut Paul’s shirt and wiped down parts of the cab's interior and exterior.
