Which type of evidence is more valuable?
Individualized evidence is more valuable than identified evidence in proving that a suspect is guilty of a crime because it can be linked directly to the suspect. Even a single piece of individualized evidence can leave a powerful impact upon judges and juries. Any additional individualized evidence that is obtained increases the chances that a person accused of a crime will be found guilty.
Individualized evidence often provides the basis of what is commonly referred to as a "smoking gun" . Examples include finding a murder victim's credit card in a suspect's pocket and bloody knife in his or her jacket moments after the crime occurred. Finding the suspect's fingerprints on the blade of the knife, as well as blood traced to the victim, provide additional individualized evidence. The police still must provide a reasonable set of circumstances by which the crime could have occurred. However, the collection of individualized evidence greatly increases the chance of conviction at the conclusion of a trial.
Identified evidence can still be useful in two ways:
when it directly supports individualized evidence and/or
when it is presented with additional pieces of identified evidence.
By itself, identified evidence merely suggests that a person may have been involved in the commission of a criminal offence, it is insufficient to provide proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the suspect committed the crime. In other words, the collection of identified evidence helps narrow the field of possible suspects, but in the absence of individualized evidence typically falls short of providing the basis for a conviction in court.
Debates about Evidence
The category of physical evidence is often debated in a court of law by the prosecution and the defense. A prosecutor may present a piece of evidence that he or she claims is individualized, but the defense attorney may argue that this piece of evidence is simply identified. To support their arguments, both prosecutors and defense attorneys will often bring in "expert witnesses" to validate the category into which the evidence has been placed.
Expert witnesses are also known as subject matter experts, people who are recognized by the courts as having credibility and a thorough understanding of specific areas of knowledge such as drug identification, ballistics, blood spatter, and alcohol analysis. However convincing an expert witness may be on the stand, it is ultimately up to the trial judge or jurors to decide if evidence is individualized or merely identified, and whether it should be accepted in court.
