The IntoxilyzerIn the early 1980’s, an American company developed the Intoxilyzer, which uses infrared technology to test breath samples for alcohol. The Intoxilyzer is an automated instrument that uses infrared spectroscopy to identify molecules based on how they absorb infrared light. The Intoxilyzer was developed to lower the chances of operator error and to eliminate the need for chemical compounds.Molecules are constantly moving, and exposure to infrared light causes a change in this movement. The chemical bonds within a molecule absorb infrared light at different wavelengths. This causes the bonds to bend or stretch.To determine if alcohol is in a sample, both the wavelengths of the chemical bonds in alcohol and the absorption of infrared light are measured. Measurement of the bonds and wavelengths helps to identify the alcohol molecule while the amount of infrared light absorbed determines the quantity of alcohol.Alcohol is water soluble and women have more fat and less water in their bodies than men. Therefore, a woman will have a higher blood alcohol concentration than a man with the same body weight and drinking the exact same amount of alcohol.Inside the IntoxilyzerMajor Components of the Intoxilyzer A: Infrared light sourceE: LensB: Breath inputF: Filter wheelC: Breath outputG: Photocell systemD: Sample chamberH: MicroprocessorThe Intoxilyzer Testing ProcedureA suspect blows into the mouthpiece of the Intoxilyzer.  The breath sample passes into the simulator (shown above) before it enters the sample chamber (D) of the Intoxilyzer. This device ensures that there is an adequate breath sample given and that the temperature of the breath sample is 34oC.Infrared light (A) passes through the sample chamber and is focused by a lens (E) onto a spinning filter wheel (F).As infrared light passes through the chamber, it interacts with the alcohol in the breath sample. This causes a decrease in light intensity.The spinning filter wheel contains narrow slits created for each of the wavelengths of the bonds in alcohol. The light passing through each filter is detected by a photocell system (G), and it is converted to an electrical pulse.The electrical pulses are relayed to a microprocessor (H) that interprets them and prints the BAC calculation onto a digital screen. If the temperature of a breath sample from an impaired driving suspect drops below 34oC to 33oC, the Intoxilyzer reading can go down by as much as 7%."I made a commitment to completely cut out drinking alcohol… and the floodgates of goodness have opened up to me, spiritually and financially."- Denzel Washington (Popular American Actor)
