The Central Park Jogger Case RevisitedOn April 19 1989, a young lady left her apartment around 9 PM to jog in New York's Central Park.  Nearly five hours later, she was found comatose lying in a puddle of mud within the park.  She had been raped her skull was fractured, and she had lost about 75% of her blood.  When the woman recovered, she had no memory of what happened to her.  The brutality of the crime sent shock waves through the city and seemed to fuel a national perception that crime was running rampant and unchecked through the streets of New York.Already in custody at the station house of the Central Park Precinct was a group of 14 and 15 year old boys who had been rounded up leaving the park earlier in the night by police who suspected that they had been involved in a series of random attacks.Over the next two days, four of the teenager gave video tape statements, which they later recanted (meaning they tried to withdraw their statements), admitting to participating in the attack.  Ultimately, give of the teenagers were charged with the crime.  Interestingly, none of the semen collected from the victim could be linked to any of the defendants.  However, according to the testimony of a forensic analyst, two head hairs collected from one of the defendant's clothing microscopically compared to the victim, and a third hair collected from the same defendant's T-shirt microscopically compared to the victim's pubic hair.  Besides these three hairs, a fourth hair was found to be microscopically similar to the victim's.  This hair was recovered from the clothing of Steven Lopez, who was originally charged with rape, but not prosecuted for the crime.  Hairs were the only pieces of physical evidence offered by the district attorney to directly link any of the teenagers to the crime.  The hairs were cited by the district attorney as a way for the jury to know that the videotaped confessions of the teenagers were reliable.  The five defendants were convicted and they ultimately served from 9 to 13 years.Matias Reyes was arrested August 1989, more than three months after the jogger attack.  He pleaded guilty to murdering a pregnant woman, raping three others and a robbery.  He was sentenced to 33 years to life.  In January 2002, Reyes confessed to the Central Park attack.  Follow-up tests revealed tat Reyes's DNA compared to semen recovered from the jogger's body and her sock.  Other DNA tests showed that the hairs offered into evidence at the trial did not emanate from the victim, and so, in fact, could not be used to link the teenagers to the crime as the district attorney  had argued.After an 11 month re investigation of the original charges, a New York State Supreme Court judge dismissed all the convictions against the five men in the Central Park jogger case.Although the original suspects had confessed on videotape in the presence of a parent or guardian, they retracted their statements within weeks, claiming that they had been intimidated, lied to, and coerced into making false confessions. Salaam confessed to being present only after the detective falsely told him that fingerprints had been found on the victim's clothing. According to Salaam, "I would hear them beating up Korey Wise in the next room", and "they would come and look at me and say: 'You realise you're next.' The fear made me feel really like I was not going to be able to make it out."  While the confessions themselves were videotaped, the hours of interrogation that preceded the confessions were not.Sources: Saferstein, Richard. Criminalistics: an introduction to forensic science. Prentice-Hall, 1981.Wikipedia Contributors. “Central Park jogger case.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 15 Mar. 2018, en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Park_jogger_case.Side note: In 2019, a Netflix miniseries based on the case of the Central Park Five was released called When They See Us. If you find this case interesting, you might enjoy it!
