DNA - The Molecule behind Forensic Genetics
Inside Your CellsDiagram of an animal cell. Every biological organism is composed of numerous microscopic cells. An average human is made up of over 300 trillion cells. Despite the vast number of cells that each organism contains, the contents of cells are amazingly similar from organism to organism. A dog looks much different than a cat and a human looks much different than a cow; however, each living creature contains the same type of organelles in their cells. For example, all cells contain a nucleus, mitochondria, lysosomes, ribosomes, and endoplasmic reticulum, and all of these cellular organelles are made up of proteins. That is why proteins are known as the "building blocks of life".The nucleus of each cell contains chromosomes, but the number of chromosomes varies from organism to organism. The body cells of a horse contain 66 chromosomes, the body cells of a pig contain 38 chromosomes, and the body cells of a dog contain 84 chromosomes. A normal human body cell contain 46 chromosomes, except for sex cells (egg and sperm) which contain only half the number of chromosomes (that is, human egg and sperm contain 23 chromosomes each).Chromosomes provide the "genetic blueprint" for the thousands of different proteins found in the body. The information inside the chromosomes provide the important directions to create these proteins. Without chromosomes, one's body would no longer be able to make proteins and he or she could not survive.A photo of a map of 23 pairs of human chromosomes or 46 individual human chromosomes. To create this map, the chromosomes are removed from a single cell and are then photographed. The photographed chromosomes are organized into a map such as the one above, which is called a karyotype."To have a successful case in court these days, the prosecutor needs DNA linking the suspect to the victim; either his DNA on, in, or around the victim, or the victim's DNA somewhere on the killer's clothes or in his domicile or vehicle."- Pat Brown (Criminal Profiler)In England, detectives arrested and charged two brothers after raiding a house in which they were storing and distributing drugs. Over $40 000.00 worth of heroin, crack cocaine, and $10 000.00 in cash was found hidden in the house. Linking one of the brothers to this evidence was DNA found on a toothbrush inside a bag of cash.- Liverpool Echo, December 23, 2005.
