As you are probably aware, many crime scenes involve blood.  Blood can be used to help solve crimes.  But what exactly is blood made of?Blood is a complex fluid that consists of two main parts:Cellular Elements - this includes red blood cells, white blood cells and plateletsPlasma (or serum) - this is the liquid portion of blood that contains dissolved substances.We will examine each of these elements in detail to gain a better understanding of blood.Red Blood CellsRed blood cells are small, biconcave discs with no nucleus.  Red blood cells are also called Erythrocytes.  This comes from the Ancient Greek words erythro- (meaning red) and -cyt (meaning cell).  In blood, there are about 5 million red blood cells per milliliter.  These red blood cells carry oxygen and carbon dioxide using the red pigment hemoglobin.Each red blood cell lives for about 120 days before being removed by the liver or engulfed by white blood cells.White Blood CellsWhite blood cells are much larger than red blood cells.  They also have a nuclei (which may be fragmented as shown in the photo on the left).  White blood cells are also called Leukocytes.  This word comes from Ancient Greek Leuk- (meaning white) and -cyt (meaning cell).  White blood cells function as part of the immune system.  They are used to destroy foreign cells of the body.  In this way, they help protect the body from infections.There are many different types of white blood cells (e.g. Monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, T cells, B cells etc.) These cells all serve a unique function in our body's immune system.PlateletsPlatelets are tiny cellular fragments with no nuclei.  They are smaller than red blood cells.  Platelets are also called Thrombocytes.  This word comes from Ancient Greek Thrombos- (meaning lump or piece) and -cyt (meaning cell).Platelets are formed in bone marrow, along with white blood cells and red blood cells.  Their primary purpose is to assist with blood clotting.  When a wound occurs to the body, platelets release a protein that causes blood to clot.  This helps reduce blood loss from the body.Bone Marrow Bone marrow is located in the large bones of the body (especially the leg bones and the pelvis).  This type of tissue produces all three types of blood cells.Red blood cells and platelets can't reproduce by themselves, so without bone marrow we would soon die.PlasmaThe composition of whole blood varies slightly, but in general blood consists of mostly plasma.  By placing blood in a centrifuge (a machine that separates blood parts) we can see the components that blood is made out of as well as their proportions.Plasma contains many important proteins (e.g. antibodies, hormones, carrier molecules, etc.) that are essential to proper body functioning.Plasma is made up of about 90% water, 7-9% protein and contains glucose and other nutrients, waste products, dissolved gasses etc.
