The Breakdown of Alcohol by the Body When alcohol is being absorbed, it enters the bloodstream and dissolves in the blood plasma. As the blood travels through the body, the alcohol moves into the tissues of the body in a process called diffusion. Alcohol diffuses into every tissue of the body except fat tissue because alcohol cannot dissolve in fat. Once inside the tissues, alcohol exerts its effects upon the body.The human body considers alcohol to be a poison; therefore, the body breaks the alcohol down entirely within the kidneys, the lungs, and the liver. The kidney eliminates 5% of alcohol into the urine. The exhalation from the lungs--about 5% of the alcohol--is detected by blood alcohol testing devices. The remaining 90% of alcohol is broken down by the liver. Two dehydrogenase enzymes in the liver strip electrons from alcohol to form acetic acid, CH3COOH, a key component of vinegar. When a person drinks more alcohol than the liver can eliminate, his or her blood alcohol concentration (BAC) increases.Physiological Effects of Alcohol Upon the BrainAlcohol is a powerful drug because it affects more than one area of the brain and it affects each area differently. Some parts (such as the cerebrum) are more sensitive than others (like the medulla oblongata). As the BAC increases, more areas of the brain are affected. The order in which alcohol affects the brain is as follows: cerebrum, cerebellum, hypothalamus and pituitary gland, medulla oblongata. 1. Cerebrum: The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain. As a result, it is the most complex part. The cerebrum processes information from the senses, controls the intellect and consciousness, and initiates voluntary muscle movements. Alcohol affects the cerebrum in the following ways, all of which become more pronounced as the person’s BAC increases:Depresses behavioral inhibitions: The person becomes more talkative, more self-confident, and less socially inhibited.Slows down information processing from the senses: The person has trouble seeing, hearing, and the pain threshold is raised.Inhibits thought processes: A person does not think clearly and does not use effective judgment.2. Cerebellum: The cerebellum coordinates the movement of muscles and controls fine motor movements. For example, you can normally touch your finger to your nose in one smooth motion with your eyes closed. If your cerebellum were not functioning, this action would be extremely shaky or jerky. As alcohol affects the cerebellum, muscle movements become less coordinated. In addition to coordinating voluntary muscle movements, the cerebellum coordinates fine muscle movements involved with maintaining one’s balance. When the cerebellum is affected by alcohol, the person will frequently lose their balance. 3. Hypothalamus and Pituitary Gland: The hypothalamus controls and influences hormones released through chemical and nerve impulse actions on the pituitary gland. Specifically, alcohol stops the hypothalamus and pituitary gland’s secretion of the anti-diuretic hormone (ADH), which causes the kidney to reabsorb water. When ADH levels drop, the kidneys do not reabsorb as much water. Thus, the kidneys release more water into the urine causing the person to urinate more often. Alcohol depresses nerves in the hypothalamus that control sexual arousal and performance. As BAC increases, sexual desire may increase, but a person’s ability to perform sexually often declines. For example, male erections will be less sustained. 4. Medulla Oblongata: The medulla oblongata controls involuntary body functions such as respiration, heart rate, temperature, and consciousness. As alcohol influences the medulla oblongata, a person will begin to feel sleepy and may become unconscious as BAC increases. If the BAC gets high enough to influence breathing, heart rate, and temperature centers, a person will breathe slowly or stop breathing altogether, and both blood pressure and body temperature will fall. These conditions can be fatal.Fun Fact! Alcohol’s inhibition upon the anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) causes a person who drinks 1 litre of beer to urinate approximately 10 times more than a person drinking 1 litre of water.The following video goes into more detail about what happens to your brain when you drink alcohol.
