Forensic Studies 25
Next Step Summer School (780) 467-7929
dylan.shott@eips.ca
Course Description:
Forensic Studies 25 is the application of scientific principles, methods, and technologies for the purpose of solving
debates including legal proceedings. Through the study of forensic science, students are given the opportunity to
explore how scientific concepts from a variety of disciplines (biology, chemistry, and physics) apply specifically to this
unique field. This Course will promote the importance of scientific literacy and problem‐solving techniques. Emphasis
is placed on Canadian Methods and legal protocols as students enhance their understanding of science and to explore
this unique career area. This course is worth 3 credits.
Disclaimer: A central component of the course involves the analysis of realistic scenarios and case studies. The course
has  some  controversial  or  sensitive  components  including  blood  photographs  and  simulated  blood  experiments,
discussion of semen analysis and the use of rape kits, and examination of alcohol and substance abuse.
Course Structure:
Theme  Content  Assessment  Due Date
Introduction to
Crime Scenes
● Processing the Crime Scene
● Role of Crime Scene Investigators, Medical
Examiners, District Attorneysand Specialists
● The 7 S’s of Crime Scene Investigation
● Crime Scene Safety
Assignment
Types of Evidence  ● Types of Physical Evidence
● Fingerprint Patterns
● Latent Fingerprint Enhancement
● Crime Case Studies InvolvingFingerprint
Evidence
  Assignment,
Case Study
Assignment

Trace Evidence  ● Collecting Trace Evidence
● Microscopic Analysis of Hair
● Fibre Analysis
● Crime Case Studies InvolvingMicroscopic
Evidence
Assignment, Case
Study Assignment

Body Fluid Evidence  ● All About Blood
● Blood Evidence
● Other Body Fluid Evidence
● Crime Case Studies Involving BodyFluid Evidence
Assignment, Case
Study Assignment

Impaired Driving  ● Alcohol and Its Effects upon theHuman Body
● The Breathalyzer
● The Intoxilyzer and Consequences ofImpaired
Driving ● Crime Case Studies Involving
ImpairedDriving
Assignment (Case
Study included in
this assignment)

Polygraphing and
Document
Analysis
● Stress indicators and the PolygraphInstrument
● The Polygraph Examination
● Forensic Writing Analysis
● Case Studies Involving Polygraph And Forensic
Writing Analysis
Assignment, Case
Study Assignment

Forensic Genetics  ● DNA – Molecule behind ForensicGenetics
● The Forensic Use of MitochondrialDNA
● DNA Profiling and PopulationFrequency
● Crime Case Studies Involving ForensicGenetics
Assignment, Case
Study Assignment

Careers in
Forensic
Science
● Careers in Forensic Science
● Post‐Secondary Programs related toForensic
Science ● The CSI Effect
Assignment

Module
Assessments
● demonstrate knowledge and understanding of lessons
in Modules 1‐7
Quiz

Final Exam  ● Review of Course Material  Exam (must come
into a school to
complete)

Important Dates: 1: Modules 1-3 must be completed and submitted by Wednesday, July 10th, 2024.
                                2: Modules 4-6 must be completed and Submitted by Wednesday July 17th, 2024.
                                3: Modules 7-8 and the Final Exam must be completed and Submitted by Wednesday, July
24th, 2024.
Assessment:
Assignments are worth 60% of your final mark and online quizzes make up 25% of your final mark. The final exam is
worth 15% of your final mark.
PowerSchool:
Make sure you are accessing PowerSchool regularly to monitor your progress and review assessment information.  The due
dates provided will be placed in the comment area for each assignment.  This allows the teacher to keep track of your progress
and to ensure you complete the course.  If you are not going to meet a deadline, please contact your teacher with a plan on
when you expect to submit the missed assignment.  This will be noted in the assignment comments.  Any assignment not handed
in by the due date will receive an NHI until the assignment is handed in.  Late assignments will be flagged as late unless you have
previously communicated with your teacher.  Any assignment handed in will be checked off, when the assignment is assessed, a
percentage mark will be entered.  If something does not seem correct, or information appears to be incorrect, please contact
your teacher so errors can be fixed promptly.

Additional Credit: As part of your course you will also be receiving credit for Student Centered Learning (3
credits) as well as COM 1255 (1 credit). Outcomes for these courses are already achieved via display of skills
through normal course achievement.

Academic Support:
Mr. Dylan Shott – Next Step Outreach
Office Hours:    Monday-Friday: 8:30 am ‐ 1:00 pm
Next Step Summer School (780) 467-7929
Email: dylan.shott@eips.ca
