Short-term vs. Long-term Latent Fingerprint Samples
Fingerprint impressions can remain in place for a surprisingly long time. Even exposure to the elements such as heat, cold, and moisture very often will not destroy a fingerprint impression. However, a smudged fingerprint impression is typically of little value to forensic experts. Smudging occurs if pressure has been placed upon the fingerprint impression or when the subject’s finger slides across a surface.
Read the details and procedures carefully before you begin.
 Purpose: Compare the quality of fingerprint impressions exposed to heat, cold, and moisture for varying lengths of time.
 Materials:
water
scissors
tweezers
paper towel
aluminum foil
masking tape & pen
6 containers such as drinking cups/glasses, plastic ‘Tupperware’ containers, jars, etc.
 Procedure:
Cut out six small squares of aluminum foil approximately 2 cm x 3 cm each.
Use a paper towel carefully to clean the shiny side of each square. Try not to touch the squares after they have been cleaned. Use your tweezers to set the squares aside.
Use a piece of masking tape and a pen to label each of your six containers with one of the following:
short-term sample - water
long-term sample - water
short-term sample - cold
long-term sample - cold
short-term sample - heat
long-term sample - heat
‘Oil’ one of your fingers by rubbing it on your forehead or the side of your nose. Now press this finger onto one of the squares of aluminum; set this print aside. Again, ‘oil’ your finger and repeat this step using each of your six squares.
Half fill with tap water the containers labeled short-term sample - water and long-term sample - water.
Use tweezers to submerge one of your aluminum squares into the container labelled short-term sample - water.
Allow this sample to be submerged for 5 minutes. Then, remove the aluminum square using the tweezers. Record your observations and set this print aside on a piece of paper marked "short-term sample - water".
 Use your tweezers to place a second print inside the second container labeled "long-term sample - water". Set this sample aside to observe later.
Use tweezers and place another of your squares into a container labelled short-term sample - cold. Then, place this sample in a refrigerator.
Allow this sample to remain in the refrigerator for 5 minutes. Then, remove it with the tweezers. Record your observations and then return the print to its container.
Use tweezers and place another of your squares into your last container labelled short-term sample - heat. Then, expose this sample to a safe heat source to warm it. You could place it in the sun or on top of a furnace vent.
Allow this sample to remain exposed to some form of safe heat for 5 minutes. Then, remove it with tweezers. Record your observations and then return the print to its container.
Now, expose the remaining two samples to cold and heat for 24 hours. Repeat steps #9 through #12, but place each square in the two remaining containers labelled long-term sample.
 After 24 hours, observe the remaining three fingerprint samples you created by going to a well-lit area and holding each square at an angle with tweezers.
Latent prints should be visible on each sample because of the highly reflective properties of the aluminum foil.
Immediately after completing your visual observations, answer the related questions.
Related questions (note that this does not have to be submitted for marks):
Describe the appearance of each sample fingerprint. Consider shape, clarity, colour, etc.
 Sample
 Heat
 Cold
 Light
Short-term (5 min)
Long-term (24 hr)
Were some fingerprint impressions more visible than others? Explain.
Why were tweezers necessary for this experiment?
Why was aluminum foil rather than paper used in this experiment?
What concept does this experiment reinforce about latent fingerprints? How could this simple demonstration apply to forensic investigations?
Click here to check your answers.
