DNA Print Analysis: RFLP vs. PCRDuring the 1980s, Dr. Alec Jefferys founded two of the first DNA analysis labs in the world. One of these labs was in England; the other was situated in the United States. Dr. Jefferys called his private DNA analysis company Cellmark Diagnostics. Countless police agencies and criminal defense lawyers around the world have sought help from Cellmark Diagnostics. For example, they completed DNA analysis from the blood evidence related to the infamous O.J. Simpson murder trial.When Dr. Alec Jeffreys was working at the University of Leichester in England, he developed the DNA analysis technique known as RFLP or Restrictive Fragment Length Polymorphism. In the RFLP method, the VNTR regions of DNA are extracted from a biological source such as blood, semen, or skin and are tagged with a radioactive probe that is exposed on X-ray film. This results in an illuminated pattern of VNTR gene bands that look somewhat like a "bar code" on a package of something bought in a store. The gene band patterns are then analyzed, compared, and matched by experts. This method requires numerous cells – from 5 000 to 50 000 cells.A newer method of DNA profiling called Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) quickly replicates numerous copies of a single strand of DNA. Thus, the smaller STR regions are easily analyzed using this method. The replication of DNA is done using an instrument called a thermal cycler. Then, just as in the RFLP analysis method, gene bands are illuminated using radioactive probes, analyzed, compared, and matched. However, a major advantage to PCR analysis is that it yields results in a fraction of the time needed to complete the RFLP method. Also, PCR needs only about 50 cells rather than the thousands of cells required by RFLP.Example of illuminated DNA patterns created during either the RFLP or PCR methods In the U.S. state of Ohio, DNA analysis was used to identify a dog that killed a woman. DNA was collected from dog saliva found on the dead woman's clothing. The DNA matched one of three Rottweiler dogs found at a home where dog tracks ended from the scene of the attack.Source: The Associated Press State & Local Wire (September 5, 2003).
