Identification of Blood Evidence
The first step that a forensic investigator must take in a crime scene where blood evidence is suspected is confirming that the evidence found is blood. Some liquids when spilled and left to dry can be mistaken for blood such as paint, stain, juices, food coloring, or hair dyes. Forensic scientists use various chemical tests to confirm that the residue left behind at a crime scene is blood. In this lesson two popular chemical blood identification tests will be examined - phenolphthalein and luminal.
The Phenolphthalein Test
Trying to clean up every trace of blood after a violent crime is very difficult especially if there is great deal of blood. Often criminals think that they have sufficiently cleaned up all blood left behind, but end up missing trace amounts of blood spatter. Forensic investigators are aware of this and as a result one of the first things they will often do at a secured crime scene is bring in powerful lighting equipment to illuminate the area.
The bright lighting helps investigators find any small suspicious stains possibly of blood that may be left at a crime scene. Dried blood will appear a deep burgundy or brownish-black in color. If an investigator does find a suspicious stain - no matter how small - a photograph is taken followed by a chemical test which is performed to confirm that it is blood and not something else.
The chemical formula for phenolphthalein is C20H14O4, it is an acid-base indicator. Phenolphthalein is normally colourless in a solution but when a hydrogen atom is removed from the phenolphthalein molecule, the negatively charged ion turns the solution colour pink. In this way, phenolphthalein is colourless in a neutral or acidic solution but pink in a basic solution.
Hemoglobin is a large protein in all red blood cells that carries oxygen and carbon dioxide throughout the blood stream. In addition to carrying gases, hemoglobin breaks down toxic hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) that may build up in the blood stream. The hydrogen peroxide is broken down into two hydroxide ions, 2(OH-). The excess hydroxide ions make the blood basic.
A simple chemical test that is used by many forensic scientists is the phenolphthalein test. During the phenolphthalein test each hydroxide ion will react with a phenolphthalein molecule producing water (H2O) and a negatively charged phenolphthalein ion. The resulting solution turns a bright pink colour. These chemical reactions are outlined below:
H2O2
+ hemoglobin
=> 2 (OH-)
2 (OH-)
+ 2 C20H14O4
=> 2 C20H13O4 - +
2 H2O
colourless
bright pink
If an unknown stain at a crime scene is suspected to be blood a swab dipped in phenolphthalein is placed upon the stain and observations are then made. If the swab turns a bright pink color the stain is of blood, if the swab remains colorless then the stain is not blood. This chemical test is very popular for two reasons:
it is fast - results are immediate.
it is very sensitive - it can detect blood at 1 part to 5 million. In other words, if there is one drop of blood in a container of one million drops of water, phenolphthalein will react quickly producing a bright pink color.
One drawback to the phenolphthalein test is that it gives a positive test for any type of blood no matter the source. It does not distinguish between humans, other mammals, birds, reptiles or lower invertebrates. Further analysis (ie. microscopic or DNA) needs to be done upon the blood in question to identify its source.
Continue onward to learn more about blood evidence...
