The Future of Alcohol TestingSaliva alcohol testing is currently being reviewed as a BAC testing method. Alcohol is absorbed into the bloodstream and can be detected in the mouth, throat, stomach, and intestines.Saliva is a fluid secreted into the mouth and throat by the salivary glands located in the upper throat. Saliva helps dissolve food allowing it to be absorbed by the taste buds in the tongue and throat. Saliva moistens food that has been chewed, making travel down the esophagus to the stomach easier. Lastly, saliva contains an enzyme that chemically breaks down sucrose into glucose and fructose.There are two different saliva alcohol test methods available. In one method, a pre-treated swab is wiped inside the mouth and a colour change indicates the presence of alcohol. The darker the colour of the swab, the higher the alcohol content in the blood. In another type of testing method, a strip pad is placed on the tongue and the resulting colour is compared to a chart that shows different levels of alcohol concentration.Operation of BAC Testing DevicesWithin law enforcement agencies, operators of alcohol breath testing instruments are experienced police officers. All operators of any type of breath alcohol testing device must be trained in the use and calibration of the device because the results may be used as evidence in court.Most police officers carry portable roadside alcohol breath testing devices that operate on the same principles as full-size alcohol breath testing instruments such as a Breathalyzer or an Intoxilyzer. These portable alcohol breath testing devices are used by police officers to conduct roadside tests upon drivers they suspect have been consuming alcohol. If people fail to pass a test on one of these roadside alcohol breath testing devices, they are arrested, have their rights read to them, and are taken to a police station.After suspects are processed at the police station, they are subjected to another alcohol breath test using a full-size instrument (Breathalyzer or Intoxilyzer). The results from both the roadside breath testing device and the full-size breath testing instruments are important pieces of evidence needed to prosecute successfully someone accused of impaired operation of a motor vehicle.In Alberta,if a person fails the roadside alcohol breath test (>80mg%) and fails the Breathalyzer or Intoxilyzer test (>80mg%), he or she will be charged with impaired drivingif a person fails the roadside alcohol breath test (>80mg%) but passes the Breathalyzer or Intoxilyzer test with a reading between 50mg% and 80mg%, a 24-hour license suspension is givenif a person fails the roadside alcohol breath test (>80mg%) but passes the Breathalyzer or Intoxilyzer test with a reading below 50mg%, he or she is released but discouraged from driving home. Police officers recite the following to an individual who has been arrested:“You have a constitutional right to a reasonable opportunity to contact a lawyer. During this time, we cannot take a statement from you or ask you to participate in any process that might provide evidence against you. You may receive free and immediate preliminary legal advice at any time during our investigation by calling the toll-free number provided by the Legal Aid Society or legal advice from any other lawyer you wish. Do you wish to waive your right to receive free and immediate preliminary legal advice, or legal advice from any lawyer you wish?”Watch the following video to see the use of BAC testing devices in action.
