Case Study: The O.J. Simpson Double Murder TrialForensic DNA analysis had been available for over 10 years; however, the general public did not know much about it before 1994. The very high profile O.J. Simpson double murder trial brought this process to the attention of the world.Background InformationOn the afternoon of June 13, 1994, in the upscale suburb of Brentwood, Los Angeles, California, the slain bodies of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman were found. The bodies, discovered by her neighbours, were lying in Ms Simpson’s yard. The crime scene was a bloody mess as both victims had died from multiple stab wounds inflicted during a violent struggle between the victims and their attacker(s). When members of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) arrived, they found one black leather glove soaked in blood and some bloody footprints, but no weapon or fingerprints.Nicole was the ex-wife of famed NFL superstar/sportscaster/actor O.J. Simpson. She and O.J. had two young children -- a boy and a girl. Nicole and O.J.’s marriage had been turbulent. She had called the police to their home on at least two occasions after O.J. had become violent with her. After they divorced, they shared custody of their children and had frequent contact with each other.Ron Goldman was an aspiring actor/model who worked as a waiter at a popular restaurant. Ron and Nicole were acquaintances, and there was some speculation that they were romantically involved; however, this has never been confirmed.When police went to O.J. Simpson’s estate to notify him of his ex-wife’s death, he was not there. However, detectives discovered bloodstains on the outside of his Ford Bronco that was parked on the street. They also found a black leather glove, soaked in blood, laying behind his house. This gave the police enough reason to obtain a search warrant for O.J.’s home.When Simpson’s home was searched, two black socks with blood on them were recovered from his bedroom, and some small droplets of blood were found on his driveway leading up to his house.After police eventually found O.J. Simpson and informed him of his ex-wife’s death, they began questioning his alibi on the evening of June 13th. Mr. Simpson told police that he met Nicole and her family at their daughter’s dance recital in the afternoon. He then went home and spent the early evening with his friend/house guest, Kato Kaelin. O.J. then said that he had been picked up from his estate late in the evening and was driven by limo to the airport, flying to Chicago at 11:45 p.m. When Kato Kaelin was questioned, he told police that he had been with O.J. from 7:00 p.m. until 9:45 p.m. Then O.J. said he was “tired” and Kato did not see him again until 11:00 p.m. From between 9:45 p.m. until 11:00 p.m. on June 13th, O.J.’s whereabouts were unknown.Within a week of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman’s deaths, O.J. Simpson was charged with murder. The LAPD had many types of evidence against O.J. Simpson; however, one of the key pieces of evidence used by the prosecution was the DNA evidence found at the crime scene.The DNA Evidence & ProbabilityThe murder of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman was violent, and as a result the exclusive source of DNA was blood. All the DNA evidence found was analyzed by two different agencies: a private laboratory, Cellmark Diagnostics Inc., and a government facility, the California Department of Justice.Remember that some sections of DNA are more distinctive than others (that is, VNTR, STR). Therefore, a DNA match is supported by a probability ratio based upon population frequency values. The probability ratio predicts the numerical chance that the DNA match could belong to someone other than the individual specified.More than 100 pieces of DNA blood evidence were used in the Simpson & Goldman murder case. Listed below are ten samples from the DNA evidence compiled.Where blood was found:DNA matched to:Probability:O.J.’s Bronco - steering wheelNicole B. Simpson1 in 520O.J.’s Bronco - center consoleRon Goldman1 in 520O.J.’s Bronco - dashboardO.J. Simpson1 in 12O.J.’s Bronco - carpetNicole B. Simpson1 in 990O.J.’s bedroom - black sock ANicole B. Simpson1 in 7.7 billionO.J.’s bedroom - black sock AO.J. Simpson1 in 520O.J.’s bedroom - black sock BNicole B. Simpson1 in 990Outside O.J.’s home - gloveRon Goldman1 in 1.2 billionNicole’s House - beside victimsO.J. Simpson1 in 240 000Nicole’s House - rear gateO.J. Simpson1 in 520The Verdict and Related AftermathDespite the DNA evidence, the jury deliberated for less than four hours and found O.J. Simpson not guilty of the murder of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman.After the criminal trial, the families of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman brought a civil suit against O.J. Simpson. Interestingly, at this trial O.J. Simpson was found responsible for the crime. However, because it was a civil suit, he did not go to jail. Rather, O.J. had to pay millions of dollars to both families.In another related court battle, Nicole’s parents won sole custody of Nicole and O.J.’s two young children. However, the judge also granted O.J. visitation rights.O.J. Simpson moved from Los Angeles to Florida where he enjoys playing golf and seeing his children on occasion. O.J. continues to deny any involvement in the killing of Nicole and Ron.No other suspects have been identified by the LAPD in this case. Thus, no active investigation into the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ron Goldman has occurred since the trial of O.J. Simpson in 1995.“It is a truth very certain that, when it is not in our power to determine what is true, we ought to follow what is most probable.”- Rene Descartes
