Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
M1 Introduction to Crime Scenes Assignment
12 marks
1.One of the first things that investigators do when approaching a crime scene is to
make it secure.  Givetworeasons why it’s importantto properly secure a crime
scene. (2 marks)
1)Evidence can be lost or contaminated 2) Anyone can enter the crime scene
and disrupt evidence
2.In a crime scene, there are 7 steps that investigators take in order to ensure that
protocols are being followed.  Complete the table below by describing the 7 steps
in your own words. (7 marks)
StepDescription
SecuringMake sure no one enters the crime scene; track any who do
SeparatingSeparate the witnesses so they do not compare stories/speak with
each other
ScanningDecide where photos should be taken by looking over the crime
scene
SeeingDetermine where photos should be taken - different angles,
different distances of the area and evidence
SketchingMake a rough sketch of the crime scene; include evidence and
landmarks
SearchingUse a spiral, linear, grid, or quadrant search pattern to search the
crime scene/area
Securing and
Collecting
Evidence
Properly package and seal any evidence
3.Describetwosafety precautions that should be takenat a crime scene other
than securing the scene. What would be the possible dangers if these
precautions were not taken? (3 marks)

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Any 2 of the following:
-Gloves (nitril/latex/heavy) - protection from injury or body fluid evidence; do not
contaminate evidence
-Safety helmet - protect head from falling objects
-Shoes - use appropriate shoes to ensure good traction and ankle support;
avoid injury
-Eye protection - avoid chemical splashes, fumes or items bouncing into eyes
-Mask - protect from chemicals or odours that can affect the respiratory system
-Protective suit - keeps biohazards off your skin

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
M2A Individualized and Identified Physical Evidence Assignment
22 Marks
The following scenarios are based upon actual crime cases.
Crime Case 1
One night a hit-and-run collision occurs; a vehicle that lost control at an intersection
strikes a parked car. The suspect vehicle speeds away after the collision. Although a
license plate number was not obtained, a witness noted that the suspect vehicle was a
blue half-ton truck. In addition to fragments of blue paint, police officers find one half of
a distinctive plastic license plate frame at the scene and determine that it does not
belong to the victim’s car. Several hours after the collision, police officers find a
damaged blue half-ton truck that has half a plastic license plate frame that matches the
fragments of frame found at the earlier collision.
1.      Is the license plate evidence individualized or identified? Explain your answer with
details from the scenario. (2)
●Identified
●License plate matches truck, but does not specifically tie to driver
●Car could’ve been stolen
2.      What type of physical evidence are the paint fragments? Explain. (2)
●Identified
●Same blue paint may be used in many cars
Crime Case 2
Several red cotton fibres are found upon the ledge of a window that had been broken to
gain entry into a home. A person wearing a torn red cotton jacket is apprehended
nearby. Tests conducted later show that the fibres from the crime scene and the fibres
from the person’s jacket have identical physical properties.
1.      Explain why the jacket would be consideredidentified evidence rather than
individualized. (2)

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
●Fiber from the crime scene matches fiber of the suspect’s jacket but multiple
people could own the same coat
●You could say the tear on the jacket is from the window however it could have
been torn before by something else
Crime Case 3
1.      State how each of the following groups would have likely categorized (as
individualizedoridentified) the single hair strandthat presented as evidence. Justify
your answer for each question. (6)
a.       The Prosecution
●The hair presented in this case was considered to be anindividualizedpiece
of evidence because the mitochondrial DNA within the hair matched the
victim.
b.      Scott Petersen’s Defense Team
●The hair presented in this case was considered to beidentifiedbecause the
defense thought that mtDNA was not as reliable as nuclear DNA testing.
c.       The Jury
●Because Scott Peterson was found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt,  the
jury must have agreed with the prosecution and found that the hair was an
individualizedpiece of physical evidence.
2.      Why was this single piece of physical evidence useful in helping the jury convict
Scott Peterson? (2)
●By itself this single piece of evidence may not have been enough to convict
Scott Peterson.  However, in combination with the other types of evidence
presented (i.e., his actions, unusual behavior, taped conversations), it was a
powerful piece of physical evidence.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Fingerprint Analysis
1.      Can fingerprints be altered or disguised? Explain thoroughly. (2)
●Fingerprints can be slightly altered through damage and scarring, however the
individual ridge patterns will still remain the same.  The skin on your fingers will
regrow with the same pattern as before.
2.      How reliable is fingerprinting as a means of Identification? Explain thoroughly and
provide specific examples from an actual crime. (2)
●Very reliable, each person’s fingerprint is completely unique
●Over 100 different minutae can be identified in fingerprints to match them to
suspects
●Give an example from any crime
3.     Identify two specific elements of fingerprints that can be analyzed. (2)
●General fingerprint pattern (loops, whorls, arches)
●Other ridge characteristics (i.e. bifurication, islands, etc.)
4.      What is a Latent Fingerprint? How are latent fingerprints collected? (2)
●A fingerprint that is not visible to the naked eye but can be enhanced using
forensic techniques.
Methods used:
○Lifting powder can be applied, the powder adheres to the oils from the
fingerprint impression.  This can then be removed with tape.
○Iodine Fumigation.  Iodine is placed in a container with a piece of paper
containing a latent fingerprint.  The iodine combines with the sodium in
the sodium chloride (sweat) and creates a dark-blue print.
○Cyanoacrylate fumigation.  This chemical found in superglue can be
used to produce a visible white-ish grey film on a latent print.  This is
especially noticeable on dark surfaces.  The resulting print can be
photographed.  This is useful on solid smooth or lightly textured
surfaces.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Fingerprint Analysis Case Studies Assignment
35 marks
Characteristics of Fingerprints
a.Research and define each of the following fingerprint characteristics. Be sure to
cite the sources you use (refer back to the course information if you do not
remember how to properly reference resources).
b.Find pictures to represent each fingerprint characteristic.  On each picture make
sure the ridge characteristics are obvious (these will help with identifying
fingerprint patterns when looking at a set of fingerprints). See the example
provided below.
HINT:You can add in the deltas, ridges, and linesusing Snip & Sketch or another
similar copy and paste app.  Once you have drawn on them copy and/or save the
picture, then insert it into the table. If you are using a tablet, you can also draw directly
on the document. The first one has been done for you:
***1 mark for definition, 1 mark for proper pattern, 1 mark for highlighting key
characteristics (deltas, imaginary line, ridge characteristics)
1. Plain Whorl:A whorl fingerprint
pattern that has two
deltasandat least one
ridge making a complete
circuit,which may be
spiral, oval, circular, or
any variant of a circle.
Animaginary linedrawn
between the two deltas
must touch or cross at
least one of the
recurving ridges within
the inner pattern area.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
2. Central Pocket Loop
Whorl (3):
A type of print pattern
that hastwo deltasand
at leastone friction ridge
that makes one
complete circuit,which
may be spiral, oval,
circular, or any variant of
a circle; an imaginary
line drawn between the
two deltas does not
touch or cross the
“central pocket” (the
recurving ridges within
the inner pattern area).
3. Double Loop Whorl
(3):
A type of print pattern
that consists of two
separate loop
formations (yellow and
green) with two
separate and distinct
sets of shoulders and
two deltas.
4. Accidental Whorl (3):A type of print pattern
consisting of the
combination of two
different types of
patterns (excluding the
plain arch) with two or
more deltas; or a print
pattern type that
possesses some of the
Examples (there are many)

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
requirements for two or
more different types of
patterns; or a print
pattern type that
conforms to none of the
definitions of a pattern.
5. Plain Arches (3):A type of print pattern in
which the friction ridges
enter on one side of the
print and flow out the
other side with a rise or
wave in the center.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
6. Tented Arches (3):A type of print pattern
similar to the plain arch
but that possesses an
angle, upthrust (central
rise), or two of the three
basic characteristics of
the loop.
7. Radial Loops (3):
Hand should be
indicated R or L
A loop pattern in which
the pattern flows in the
direction of the radius
bone of the forearm,
toward the thumb
(Remember to flip the
hand over to determine
this as it changes
depending on what
hand the print is from.)
Right Hand:
8. Ulnar Loop (3):
Hand should be
indicated R or L
A loop pattern where the
pattern flows in the
direction of the ulna
bone of the forearm,
toward the little finger.
(Remember to flip the
hand over to determine
this as it changes
depending on what
hand the print is from.)
Right Hand:
Source(s) (2): Use APA or MLA formatsMake sure thesources are legit. They
should be properly cited, not just a URL.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
APA:
Fingerprint Analysis. (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.forensicsciencesimplified.org/prints/glossary.htmlrather than just the
URL:http://www.forensicsciencesimplified.org/prints/glossary.html
MLA:
Jury Rocamora Follow. “Whorl Patterns.” SlideShare,
www.slideshare.net/juroc26/whorl-patterns.ratherthan just the URL:
https://www.slideshare.net/juroc26/whorl-patterns
Now put the information you have found into practice with the following Case
Study:
Two suspects wearing ski masks walked into the National Bank in the town of Marioville
shortly after it had opened. Suspect #1 passed a note that demanded money to a bank
clerk.
Assignment background information omitted - only questions included:
1.Identify the types of fingerprint patterns from the list below that were found on the
pieces of evidence given.  Assume all prints are from the right hand. (4)
●Ulnar loop
●Radial loop
●Double Loop
●Tented arch
●Simple arch
●Simple/Plain whorl
●Accidental whorl
●Central pocket whorl
EvidenceNote given to
bank teller
Five dollar billGlass #1 from
restaurant
Glass #2 from
restaurant
Fingerprint
Pattern
Ulnar loopSimple/Plain
whorl
Ulnar loopSimple/Plain
whorl

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
2.Identify the pair of fingerprint patterns as listed below that represents the pair of
fingerprint patterns of each of the suspects given below.  Assume all prints are
from the right hand. (4)
●Ulnar loop
●Radial loop
●Double Loop
●Tented arch
●Simple arch
●Simple/Plain whorl
●Accidental whorl
●Central pocket whorl
SuspectJoseph LyonsDoug BanesReynold
Chapman
Troy Atkins
Fingerprint
Pattern 1
Tented archUlnar LoopDouble LoopUlnar Loop
Fingerprint
Pattern 2
Accidental
Whorl
Simple/Plain
Whorl
Central Pocket
Whorl
Simple/Plain
Whorl
3.Why is determining if a set of fingerprints is from the right or left hand important?
(2)
●An ulnar loop and radial loop are determined based on the hand
●The print is based on flipping the hand over then looking at where the loop
starts and ends - if the loop opens towards the thumb or baby finger
4.Which two suspects do you think are responsible for robbing the National Bank in
Morinville?  Givethreepieces of evidence for yourdecision. (2)
Doug Baines (Suspect 2)  and Troy Atkins (Suspect 4)
●Fingerprints match
●Hair color matches
●Height matches suspect description

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Trace Evidence Assignment
14 marks
1.Complete the table by giving an example of each of the types of trace evidence
that would likely be found at a crime scene. (4)
Type of EvidenceExample
IdentifiedFootprints, fabric
IndividualizedFingerprints, blood
OrganicDust, pollen
InorganicGunshot residue
2.Hair and fibre evidence can be valuable in criminal investigations.  Is hair and
fibre evidence considered identified or individualized evidence? Explain your
answer.  (2)
●Identified evidence, because hair/fiber analyzed under a microscope cannot be
tied directly to a suspect with certainty.
●If the hair’s DNA were analyzed, then it would be considered individualized
3.What are some of the limitations of hair and fibre evidence? (2)
●Most human hair looks very similar under a microscope
●Both men and women can have long or short hair
●Some fibers are extremely common

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
4.The following evidence was found at a crime scene.  When it was examined
under a microscope, the following image was taken.
a.Give 2 observations about the evidence (2)
●Middle of the strand is visible
●Middle has a stacked pattern (squares stacked in a row)
●Outside of the strand is not smooth
b.Classify the evidence as either hair or fiber. Explain how you came to this
conclusion (2)
●Presence of medulla suggests hair and the cuticle is not smooth
c.If you classified the evidence as hair, identify it as either animal or human.
If you classified the evidence as fiber, identify it as either natural or
man-made.  In both cases, explain how you came to this conclusion. (2)
●This is animal hair, because of the stacked medulla

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Trace Evidence Case Studies Assignment
Questions:
1.Did the police consider the hair evidence collected from the teenagers to be
identified or individualized evidence?  Explain. (2)
●The police considered the evidence to be individualized.  They believed that
the hair evidence could be directly linked with the suspects.
2.Why is it important that microscopic hair comparisons be confirmed by DNA
determinations? (2)
●Many human hair samples are too similar in appearance to be individualized.
Hence, DNA should be used when attempting to individualize hair evidence.
Questions:
1.What led investigators to conclude that the bandage found at the crime scene
belonged to the suspect and not to the victim and that the suspect belonged to
the military? (2)
●No blood from the victim was found, so the bandage did not belong to the
victim
●A military disinfectant was found on the bandage
2.Describe the fibre evidence that was found to support the case against Samuel
Morgan. (2)
●Morgan’s sister-in-law’s bandage fiber matched the fiber from the bandage
found at the crime scene

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Body Fluid Evidence Assignment
21 marks
1.There are many different types of body fluid evidence that would be useful at a
crime scene.  Complete the table below to outline 4 types of body fluid evidence.
(8 marks)
Type of EvidenceWhy it is useful
Type of crime where this
evidence would appear
BloodDetermining the blood type
of the victim or suspect
Violent crime, murder,
assault
SalivaIf the victim is a secretor,
this can be used to
determine their blood type
Sexual assault
SemenThis can be evidence of
sexual assault.  DNA can
be taken from semen
Sexual assault
SkinCan be linked with injuries
on the victim or suspect.
DNA can be taken.
Abduction, unlawful
restraint
2.There are many tools that forensic scientists use to analyze body fluid evidence
at a crime scene.  Complete the table below to demonstrate your knowledge of
these techniques. (8 marks)
Tool
How it is
used
Why it is usedAdvantagesDisadvantages
PhenolphthaleinTurns pink if
in contact
with
hemoglobin
To determine if
an unknown
substance is
blood
Fast
Very sensitive
False positives
LuminolGlows when
sprayed on
blood
To find trace
amounts of
blood that has
been cleaned
Can be used
after a long
time
Does not affect
other tests
Very sensitive
False positives

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
3.Police suspect that there was a violent murder committed inside a house and that
the culprit cleaned up after the attack before burying the body.  Suggest possible
areas within the house that investigators could check for small traces of blood
that the culprit may have missed while cleaning up. (3 marks)
●Underneath carpets or floorboards
●Splatter on the ceiling
●Under baseboards
●Inside drains or sinks
4.Explain how being able to prove that a suspect is a ‘secretor’ be helpful to
investigators? (2 marks)
●Secretors are people who show their blood type in other body fluids besides
blood.  This information can be used to tie a suspect to a crime, especially if
the suspect has a rare blood type.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Body Fluid Case Studies Assignment
28 marks
Crime Case Study #1: Unconvincing Circumstantial Evidence
1.Explain how the blood type of the killer could be determined from the cigarette
butts found at the crime scene? (2)
The killer was a secretor, meaning their saliva can determine their blood type
2.Why was the determination that the killer of Walter Dinivan had blood type AB+
an important piece of evidence? (2)
The AB+ blood type is very rare - only found in ~3% of the population
3.Identify the physical evidence found at Walter Dinivan’s home as either Identified
or Individualized crime scene evidence. (4)
EvidenceIdentified or Individualized
Paid off bank loanIndividualized
Brown paper bagIdentified
Cigarette buttsIndividualized
Fingerprint on glassIndividualized
Crime Case Study #2: Which Neighbour is a Killer?
1.Why does the blood spatter residue indicate that it was unlikely that  Graham
Backhouse had been pursued by Colyn Bedale-Taylor in the hallway? (2)
The blood stain pattern indicates that the blood fell from a stationary place.  Colyn
was likely not moving quickly.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
2.What type of blood spatter pattern should have appeared in the hallway if
Graham Backhouse had shot Colyn Bedale-Taylor in self-defense as he claimed?
(2)
The blood would be in smaller droplets and be more spread out.  The blood would
also likely form teardrop shaped droplets.
3.Explain what the blood spatter evidence in the hallway of Graham Blackhouse’s
home indicated about the events. (2)
Graham Blackhouse likely stabbed himself and then shot Corlyn.
Crime Case Study #3:The Death of Tammy's Parrot
1.Explain why police became suspicious of Tammy's story after discovering she
had only a few superficial cuts on her lower arms. (2)
Very large amount of blood that could not have come from Tammy’s cuts; neighbours
indicated they had not seen Tammy’s ex-husband for over a month and did not
overhear any arguing on the day in question
2.Describe the most probable source of the majority of blood smeared upon
Tammy and on her apartment walls. (2)
From her parrot that had been stabbed to death and hidden under the bed
3.Explain how microscopic analysis of the blood smeared at the crime scene could
help to prove the source. (2)
Under a microscope, red blood cells from humans are anucleated (no nucleus) but
red blood cells from a bird would have a nucleus

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Crime Case Study #4: How did Phil Beardman die?
1.What does the blood spatter evidence found on the wall above the stairs in Phil's
condo indicate? (2)
Phil was likely hit by a blunt object before falling down the stairs - the droplets on the
floor and edge show a medium-velocity impact blood spatter - the strands of blood
indicate that he was moving after being hit
2.From the list of possible events below, order the most likely sequence of events
that occurred on the night Phil died from 1 (first) to 4 (last). You do not need to
use all of the events. (4)
Possible EventOrder (1 to 4)
Susan pushed Phil down the stairs.4
Phil began bleeding from his injuries.3
Phil and Susan had a loud argument.1
Phil accidentally slipped and fell down the
stairs.
Susan hit Phil with an object at the top of
the stairs.
2
Susan hit Phil with an object at the bottom
of the stairs.
3.Explain why the blood spatter evidence indicates that it is unlikely that Phil had
fallen down the stairs by accident as Susan suggested. (2)
There were blood spatter patterns that indicated free-falling blood which would mean
that Phil would have had to have been standing at the top of the stairs after he was
hit.  The strands of blood indicate that while he was bleeding he was pushed down the
stairs - indicates movement towards where he landed at the bottom of the stairs
where the blood started to pool.

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Impaired Driving Assignment
27 marks
1.Complete the following chart that summarizes the major physiological and behavioral
changes in the human body when exposed to increasing amount of alcohol. (10)
BAC (mg/100mL)SymptomsPart(s) of Brain Affected
Euphoria (30-120)
●
more self-confident
●
slow reaction time
●
poor judgment
●
shortening of attention
span
●
flushed face
●
difficulty with fine
movements
Cerebrum
Excitement (90-250)
●
drowsiness
●
difficulties understanding
or remembering
●
increasingly slower reaction
time
●
poor coordination and loss
of balance
●
blurred vision
Cerebrum, Cerebellum
Confusion (180-300)
●
confusion; dizziness and
perhaps staggering; cannot
see clearly
●
highly
emotional--aggressive,
withdrawn, or overly
affectionate
Cerebrum, Cerebellum,
Hypothalamus

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
●
slurred speech;
uncoordinated movements;
high pain tolerance
Stupor (250-400)
●
hardly move at all; cannot
respond to stimuli; cannot
stand or walk
●
vomiting; lapses in and out
of consciousness
Cerebrum, Cerebellum,
Hypothalamus, Medulla
Oblongata
Death (350-500)
●
unconscious; reflexes are
depressed (for example,
pupils do not respond).
●
breathing slow /shallow;
lower than normal body
temperature; heart rate
may slow.
All parts are affected
2.Identify two specific symptoms caused by alcohol consumption that impair a person’s
ability to drive.  Explain, in detail, how these two symptoms impair a person’s ability to
drive safely. (4)
●
Reaction time is slower, person is unable to respond quickly to changing road
situations
●
Poor judgement, person is unable to make correct driving decisions
●
Difficulty with motor movements, lack of coordination makes mechanics of driving
difficult
●
Drowsiness, person’s ability to react is slower
●
Blurred vision, unable to see hazards/pedestrians
3.State the BAC that defines a person as intoxicated under the law and guilty of impaired
driving in Canada. (1)
0.08 mg%

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
4.Given the information about the symptoms of alcohol consumption at various BACs, do
you feel that the legal limit for impaired driving is too low, too high or just right?  Justify
your answer. (2)
Answers may vary

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Polygraphing and Forensic Writing Analysis Assignment
15 marks
1.Explainthreeways that a polygraph examination canhelp in the police
investigation of a crime. (3 marks)
●Detect when a suspect is not being truthful
●Cause a suspect to be anxious enough to confess
●If a suspect refuses to take one, it can indicate potential guilt
2.a) Identify the type of person who may lie repeatedly but who will very likely pass
a polygraph examination. (1 mark)
●A compulsive liar
b) Explain how this type of person is able to pass polygraph examinations. (1
mark)
●They are so accustomed to lying compulsively that they do not exhibit the
same anxious symptoms that the polygraph detects
●They can fool themselves into believing their own lies
3.The Supreme Court of Canada in 1987 ruled that polygraph evidence cannot be
used in a criminal trial.
a) Using your knowledge of polygraphing, give two reasons why polygraph
evidence is not admissible in court. (2 marks)
●The results can be misinterpreted, they are often subjective and based on the
experience and skill of the examiner
●The polygraph cannot detect all lies
●The polygraph may detect when someone is lying because they are simply
anxious about certain topics
b) Do you agree with the Supreme Court’s decision to disallow polygraph
evidence?  Explain why or why not. (2 marks)
Answers may vary

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
4.Police are attempting to identify the writer of a threatening note.  Below are the
writing samples from 6 possible suspects.
Photograph A: Writing Samples from Six Subjects
Photograph B: Threatening Note
Which suspect do you think is most likely to have written the note?  Give two pieces of
evidence that indicate this. (3 marks)
●Suspect 5
●Long tail on the end of ‘h’
●Full loop on ‘g’
●Shape of letter ‘y’ (two lines)
●Vertical slope of letters

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
5.Explain three specific ways that forensic experts try to minimize the alteration of
a handwriting sample by a criminal suspect. (3 marks)
●having the suspect write several pages
●using the same or similar type of paper as the suspect document
●using the same or similar writing instrument as used in the suspect document
●having the suspect use many of the words and sentences found in the suspect
document
●not providing any assistance with spelling, punctuation, or with use of lower or
upper case letters
●telling the suspect what to write (verbal dictation)
●having the suspect write the same verbal dictation three separate times

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Polygraphing and Forensic Writing Case Studies Assignment
14 marks
Crime Case Study #1: Nine Long Days - The Susan Smith Case
1.Give two pieces of case evidence that were determined from polygraph testing
that helped the police in solving this crime. (2 marks)
●David’s results indicated that he did not know about the disappearance
●Susan’s results indicated that she was being deceptive
2.Using your knowledge of polygraph tests, give two reasons why Susan Smith’s
polygraph results were inconclusive even though she was guilty. (2 marks)
●She may have been nervous throughout the test, meaning her anxiety levels
did not differ sufficiently when lying or being truthful
●She may be a compulsive liar
●She may have truly believed her lies
●The officer conducting the test may have been inexperienced
Crime Case Study #2: Kidnapping of the Lindbergh Baby
1.Using your knowledge of graphology, givetwopossiblereasons that led the
police to believe that the ransom notes were written by the same person. (2
marks)
●The letters may have had a consistent slant
●The letters may have been written with the same type of pen
●The letters may have had unique features that remained consistent
2.In the writing samples below, describe the distinct features oftwoletters that
indicate the samples were written by the same person (2 marks)

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
●The letter y
●The letter t is not crossed
●The letter o is open (like a u)

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Forensic DNA Evidence Assignment
18 marks
1.Complete the chart below to analyze the benefits and drawbacks of both RFLP
and PCT methods of DNA print analysis. (4)
RFLPPCT
Cells needed5000 to 50 000 cells50 cells
Time requiredTime consumingMuch faster
2.Explain how VNTR and STR sections of DNA used in forensic DNA analysis.
How are investigators able to determine a DNA match using these techniques?
(2)
●Investigators examine “junk” DNA, which are the VNTR or STR segments.
●By examining DNA at the same locus, investigators can determine if the
segments are a match
●By matching 5 different loci, they can determine conclusively that the DNA
samples are matching.  The chances of two different people having the same
VNTR or STR at 5 different places is extremely unlikely.
3.Explain the main differences between nuclear DNA and mtDNA.  Give an
example of when each would be used. (3)
●Nuclear DNA is inherited from both parents whereas your mtDNA is inherited
from your mother and will be identical to hers (all children who share the same
biological mother have the same mtDNA).
●Nuclear DNA is contained in the nucleus of the cell, where as mtDNA is
contained in the mitochondria of the cell
●DNA will be used when it can be extracted from an intact cell nucleus, mtDNA
can be extracted from ancient or badly damaged remains
4.Why is it important to include a probability ratio with every DNA print match? (2)
●This determines the strength of the match (how likely the DNA is to be an
actual match). Example: a probability ratio of 1:55 000 000 would mean one
other person in 55 million could have the same DNA pattern - this would be a

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
strong match.  The more chance that others could be matched means the
match isn’t as strong (weak ratio 1:1200 vs strong ratio 1:4 000 000 000.
5.a) Complete the chart below to outline the benefits and drawbacks implications of
having a comprehensive national or global DNA data bank. (2)
BenefitsDrawbacks
●If DNA is found at a crime scene, it
can be quickly matched with a
suspect in the database
●Information could be hacked
●Time consuming to collect all the
data
b) Are you in favor or against having a comprehensive national or global DNA
data bank?  Give at least 2 reasons for your answer. (2)
Answers will vary.
Fictional Case Study: The Bandana Bank Robbery
1.The DNA from the red bandana as well as from each of the suspects was
analyzed.  The results are below.  From this evidence, identify the suspect whose
DNA matches the profile created from the hair found in the red bandana. (1)

Forensic Science 25 Answer Keys
Suspect 3
2.Due to the fire, only 60-75 intact cells were found in each of the bandanas.
Which type of DNA analysis method will likely be required to analyze this limited
number of cells - PCR or RCLP?  Justify your choice. (2)
PCR; RFLP requires numerous cells to run an analysis (5000 to 50000 cells) where
as PCR only requires about 50 cells to run an analysis; PCR also takes a fraction of
the time to process the DNA samples vs. using RFLP
