Steps to Being Successful in an Independent Study Course
1. Take Responsibility
You have enrolled in this course because you have a need to learn outside a traditional classroom and a
desire to be successful.  Are you prepared to do what it takes to achieve success?  Be disciplined and
committed.  Be willing to problem solve and search for answers.  Actively seek help when you need it - not just
from your teacher, but from all the resources you have access to.  In an independent study environment, your
teacher is a facilitator of learning; they do not simply deliver the knowledge and you simply open your mind to
receive it.  Confidently seek it and pursue learning.  It may take some time to reframe your mindset to embrace
this way of learning as a lifelong skill that will serve you well.  You will be supported and encouraged along the
way, but ultimately the effort must come from you.  Are you ready?  Great!
2.  Invest Your Time
Remember that in a traditional high school course, you would be spending 80 minutes per day in class, plus
doing additional homework and/or studying in the evening.  You should expect and plan to spend the same
amount of time per day doing the course by independent study, perhaps more if you encounter a topic that is
particularly challenging for you.  Working at your own pace means there is the flexibility to spend less time on
concepts you master easily and more time to concepts you struggle with, but the total time invested should be
about the same as a traditional course.
3.  Manage Your Learning
Learning no longer follows the format of a classroom, but you can still apply a structure at school and at home.

1.Gather information.
Read your textbook.  Watch videos.  The more methods you use, the more familiar you will become
with the content.  You will find a lot of resources on Moodle that have been collected specifically for this
purpose.  Use them!

2.Take notes.
Record new definitions, formulas, structures and any other information that you think is relevant.  Write
it in your own words.  Follow along with examples, then try similar ones on your own.  Develop a
system of communication that works for you so that when you go back to your notes later, they still
make sense and are helpful when you get stuck.  ​A good place for tips, tricks, and calculator shortcuts
is on the back of your formula sheet.

3.Practice, practice, practice.
Repetition is important.  You may understand something right away, but in order for it to “stick”, the
pathways in your brain have to be solidified.  Repetition is important.  If you were walking through a
forest, it would be very difficult to follow a trail that had only been travelled once or twice.  A well-worn
path with recognizable landmarks would be much easier to navigate!  It is the same with your memory.
Repetition is important.  (See what I did there?)

4.Challenge yourself.
Once you understand a concept, look for a more difficult problem to solve or add to a piece of writing
using your new skills.  Don’t just move on to the next lesson, because you need more than just the
basics to be successful.  You need to be comfortable enough with your understanding that you can

adapt to new situations.  Practice questions in math are usually in increasing order of difficulty, which
means you’ve got to try the second half of each assignment before you can really conclude that you
grasp what you need to know.

5.Seek help.
Help is available in many forms.  Many students struggle with the same concepts and ask the same
questions.  You will likely find support for frequently asked questions on Moodle.  If your question is not
answered there, be organized and deliberate so you can use your time with your teacher most
effectively.  Make a list or use a symbol like a star or question mark to indicate what you need help with.
Identify what you already know, and ask something specific.  Make sure to review these questions later
and practice until you can do them on your own from start to finish with confidence.

6.Assess your learning.
Do the chapter reviews in the textbook.  Try practice quizzes online.  Use the review assignments
provided as a practice test by doing them closed-book to see what you know, then study and reattempt
anything that you don’t.  Mark your own work and analyze your mistakes or stumbling blocks.  Make
sure you are able to start every question yourself without additional support before you attempt a
summative assessment.

7.Seek feedback.
The more information you can gather about where and when you make mistakes, the more likely you
are to build awareness and improve.  Timely feedback is often more meaningful because the concepts
are still fresh and you are more likely to remember your thought process.  Try to budget the time
immediately after writing an assessment to meet with your teacher and discuss your progress.
