Crime Case Study: The Wrongfully Convicted In addition to being able to help solve crimes, the emergence of DNA profiling has also been used to exonerate innocent people of crimes that they did not commit.  The following case describes just such an event.The CrimeThe crime took place in Red Springs, a town of fewer than 4000 people in the southern part of North Carolina.  On Sunday, 25 September 1983 at approximately 12:20 a.m., Ronnie Lee Buie noticed that his eleven-year-old daughter, Sabrina Buie, was missing from their home in Robeson County when he returned home from working the midnight shift at a nearby business. On 26 September 1983, James Shaw, a friend of Ronnie Lee Buie, found Sabrina Buie's nude body in a soybean field.  She had been raped and badly beaten.The police picked up Henry Lee McCollum (19) and his half brother Leon Brown (15) were picked up by police in relation to the murder of Sabrina.  There was no physical evidence that tied the two African American youths to the crime, but a local teenager cast suspicion on Mr. McCollum and his half brother.  They had recently moved to the community from New Jersey and were considered outsiders.  In addition, the two youths were severely intellectually disabled, with IQ scores in the 50s.The ConfessionAfter five hours of questioning with no lawyer present and with his mother weeping in the hallway, not allowed to see him, Mr. McCollum told a story of how he and three other youths attacked and killed the girl. He then signed a confession statement written in longhand by the investigators.Mr. Brown, after being told that his half brother had confessed and facing similar threats that he could be executed if he did not cooperate, also signed a confession.  The other two men mentioned in Mr. McCollum's confession were never prosecuted.The Trial and SentencingThe two young defendants were prosecuted by District Attorney Joe Freeman Britt.  Both men recanted their confessions at the trial, saying that they had been coerced. Despite this, both men were found guilty.Initially, both defendants were convicted of first-degree murder and rape and received death sentences.  After new trials were ordered by the State Supreme Court, Mr. McCollum was again sentenced to death while Mr. Brown was convicted only of rape and his sentence was reduced to life.In 1994, the United States Supreme Court turned down a request to review the case.  Justice Antonin Scalia described Mr. McCollum's crime as so heinous that it would be hard to argue against lethal injection.  But Justice Harry A. Blackmun noted that Mr. McCollum had the mental age of a 9-year-old and that "this factor alone persuades me that the death penalty in this case is unconstitutional."DNA EvidenceYears later, lawyers from the Center for Death Penalty Litigation, working with private law firms, began pressing for DNA testing of the physical evidence in the case, which included a cigarette butt found near sticks used in the murder.Recent DNA testing by an independent state agency of evidence gathered in the initial investigation found a match for the DNA on the cigarette butt - not to either of the imprisoned men, but to Roscoe Artis, who lived only a block from where the victim's body was found and who had a history of convictions for sexual assault.Only weeks after her murder, in fact, Mr. Artis confessed to the rape and murder of an 18-year-old girl in Red Springs.  Mr. Artis received a death sentence, later reduced to life, for that crime and remains in prison.  Officials could not explain why, despite the remarkable similarities in the crimes, they kept their focus on Mr. McCollum and Mr. Brown even as the men proclaimed their innocence. ReleaseAfter three decades on death row, Henry Lee McCollum (50) and Leon Brown (46) were declared innocent and ordered to be released.  Following a hearing, Superior Court Judge Douglas B. Sasser determined that McCollum and Brown's sentences should be vacated "based on significant new evidence that they are in fact innocent" and that they should be released from prison.  The courtroom erupted into a standing ovation.  "We waited all these long years for this,"sid James McCollum, the father of the man released from death row. "Thank you, Jesus," he repeated.The exoneration ended decades of legal and political battles over a case that became notorious in North Carolina and received nationwide discussion, vividly reflecting the country's fractured views of the death penalty.  The exoneration based on DNA evidence was another example of the way tainted convictions have unrabeled in recent years because of new technology and legal defense efforts like those of the Center for Death Penalty Litigation.Regarding the confession that Mr. McCollum signed he said in an interview "I had never been under this much pressure, with a person hollering at me and threatening me.  I just made up a story and gave it to them so that they would let me go home."  After he signed his confession he asked "Can I go home now?" according to an account by his defense lawyers."I have never stopped believing that one day I'd be able to walk out that door," McCollum said in a videotaped interview with The News & Observer."A long time ago, I wanted to find me a good wife, I wanted to raise a family, I wanted to have my own business and everything," he said. "I never got a chance to realize those dreams.  Now I believe that God is going to bless me to get back out there."Sources: https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/us/2-convicted-in-1983-north-carolina-murder-freed-after-dna-tests.htmlhttps://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2015/06/04/north-carolina-governor-pardons-two-men-who-spent-30-years-behind-bars/?utm_term=.f7fc680444e1https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/northamerica/usa/11072129/US-half-brothers-freed-after-30-years-for-rape-and-murder-they-did-not-commit-after-new-DNA-evidence.html
