The Luminol Test
At a crime scene, large pools of blood are easy to spot, but what if all the blood has been cleaned up by the assailant?  It too can be detected using a powerful chemiluminescent compound called LUMINOL (3-aminophthalhydazide). Luminol reacts with a portion of the hemoglobin of red blood cells called 'heme'. When luminol comes into contact with ‘heme’ it reacts producing a unique product - a greenish-blue light. Luminol is very sensitive; it can detect blood at 1 part to 300 000.
Investigators use luminol at crime scenes where there is no visible blood whatsoever. They spray it over a wide area in near-total darkness so that any reaction is obvious. Officers then photograph/videotape the result, using a flash technique that picks up the glow while making the area around it visible on film.
There are several reasons to use luminol.  Luminol is non-destructive, meaning that after spraying it at a crime scene other chemical tests such as the phenolphthalein test can still be performed to confirm that it is blood. Another reason is that luminol works well even after a long period of time and after the blood has aged and decomposed. As the red blood cell ages and decomposes its exterior cell membrane breaks down and exposes the hemoglobin. Thus, the exposed hemoglobin can more easily come into contact with luminol which increases the likelihood of a reaction. In fact, if it is suspected that blood has recently been cleaned up forensic investigators will spray the area with hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution before applying luminol.
An advantage to luminol is that it can point the way to further evidence or to how events may may have unfolded. For example, if luminol sprayed onto a carpet produces a glow, officers might peel back the rug to reveal floorboards still soaked with blood. Or perhaps the glow will disclose the direction in which a criminal walked or dragged a body, or whether the victim was shot from behind or above.
Some disadvantages to luminol include the fact that it cannot distinguish between human blood and animal blood because both contain hemoglobin. Also, luminol can react in the presence of similar substances such as metals like copper, nickel, paints containing metals, rust, cleaning products like highly concentrated bleach, iodine, and even weird things like horseradish, watermelon and some citrus fruits. However, luminol's reaction to each of these differs in intensity (ie. metals cause an immediate glow which quickly fades, while blood glows longer). A forensic expert can tell the difference and then perform more conclusive tests to determine whether the blood is in fact of human origin.
So, anyone thinking that cleaning up after a bloody crime scene will erase evidence  of their crime is mistaken...blood is one stain that cannot be "shouted out"!
