Below is one of the most famous criminal documents of all time. This letter was believed to be sent by the serial killer Jack the Ripper in October 1888. Included with the letter was half a human kidney. Examination of the kidney found it to be similar to one removed from a victim, but this finding was never confirmed.www.casebook.org/ ripper_letters/Forensic Writing AnalysisThe technique of forensic writing analysis is used by law enforcement in two ways:To determine if a document has been deliberately forged (cheques, written confession, suicide notes, lottery tickets)To determine the culprit responsible for writing a crime scene document ( ransom letter, threatening letter)Interestingly, forensic writing analysis may involve not only documents written on paper. It may also involve writing found upon walls, windows, doors, or other crime scene objects. Forensic document analysis is a broad field that involves such scientific techniques ashandwriting analysis (graphology)typescript analysispaper analysischromatographic ink analysisstatement analysis profiling.GraphologyGraphology is based on the premise that each person has a unique handwriting style and many features make handwriting distinct. Years of training and practical experience are necessary to be considered truly an expert in this field. Three features of handwriting that are initially obvious include acquisition of slope, size of text, and design of letters and numbers.Acquisition of SlopeThe slope or angle of handwritten text is distinct and fixed, especially on unlined paper.Many people write at a consistent angle on unlined paper; some others have difficulty writing at a consistent angle on unlined paper.If the slope changes, the writer likely did so deliberately. Often, writing samples from a suspect for comparison purposes is done upon unlined paper.Size of TextIn general, the size of handwritten text (letters and/or numbers) remains constant. Some people write large text; others write small text. The overall size of one’s writing is an important handwriting feature to note.People with good pen control tend to show strong consistency in letter size. Those with a lack of pen control show more variation in the size of their letters and words.The letters created in deliberately disguised writing tend to be larger than normal.Design of Letters and NumbersGreater variation occurs in the design of more complex letters and numbers such as q, j, g, y, e, m, s, and 2, 4, 5, 8. Notice that several of these complex letters have ‘tails’, a feature which varies significantly from person to person.Less variation is evident in simple letters and numbers such as o, c, u, t, v, l, and 0, 1, 6, 7, 9.Capital letters at the beginning of a sentence tend to be unique.
