Criminal Profiling of the 9/11 LettersThe detailed FBI criminal profile of the culprit responsible for the anthrax letters was based upon the handwriting of each letter. This profile outlined the suspected linguistic and behavioral characteristics of the writer. The linguistic characteristics included unique aspects of the handwriting and words in the letter itself (such as unique slant, style of numbers, unique words used), while the behavioral characteristics included certain behaviors thought to be exhibited by the suspect (such as type of employment, social behaviors).Linguistic AssessmentThe FBI’s linguistic assessment concluded that all letters were written by the same person. Despite the limited amount of text in each letter, FBI experts noted certain distinctive characteristics in the author's handwriting style such as the following.Author used dashes (-) in the writing of the date 09-11-01 , whereas many people use the slash (/) to separate the day/month/year.Author chooses to use a formalized, more detailed version of the number one (1) instead of the simple vertical line.Author uses the words can not although many people spell it as one word, cannot.Author writes all upper case letters. In the first letter, the first word of each sentence is written in slightly larger upper case lettering.The first letters of all names are slightly larger. This is apparently the author's way of indicating a word should be capitalized. For whatever reason, he or she may not be comfortable or practiced in writing in lower case lettering.The FBI reminded the public that these same handwriting characteristics may be evident in other letters, greeting cards, or envelopes written by the suspect.Behavioral AssessmentThe forensic document experts at the FBI suggested some interesting behavioral characteristics about the suspect based on various aspects of the letters. They believed that the author of the anthrax lettersis likely an adult maleis likely employed and in a position requiring little contact with the public or other employees (He may work in a laboratory. He is apparently comfortable working with an extremely hazardous material. He probably has a scientific background to some extent or at least a strong interest in science.)has likely taken appropriate protective steps to ensure his own safety, which may include the use of an Anthrax vaccination or antibioticshas access to some laboratory equipment such as microscope, glassware, or centrifugeis familiar with the area the letters were sent from (Trenton, New Jersey) (This does not mean he currently lives in the Trenton, NJ. He is comfortable travelling in and around this locale.)did not select victims randomly (He made an effort to identify the correct address, including zip code, of each victim and used sufficient postage to ensure delivery. The offender deliberately selected NBC News, the New York Post, and the offices of Senator Tom Daschle and Senator Leahy. These targets are probably very important to the offender. They may have been the focus of previous expressions of contempt that may have been communicated to others.)is a non-confrontational person, at least in his public life (He lacks the personal skills necessary to confront others. He chooses to confront his problems long distance and not face-to-face. He may hold grudges for a long time, vowing that he will get even with them one day. There are probably other, earlier examples of this type of behavior. He may have chosen to anonymously harass other individuals or entities that he perceived as having wronged him. He may also have chosen to utilize postal service on those occasions.)may have become mission-oriented following the events of September 11, 2001 (He may have become more secretive and exhibited an unusual pattern of activity. He may have started taking antibiotics unexpectedly.)ConclusionAs far as the public knows, the FBI has not arrested any suspect or suspects responsible for the anthrax letter writing campaign. The person or persons to blame for murdering five people, causing the pain and suffering of thirteen people, and causing further anxiety in a public already in a state of shock from the deaths of thousands in the 9/11 attacks still remains at large.The FBI Forensic Document Analysis unit has experts who analyze typewriter ribbons, photocopiers, graphic arts, and plastic bags. This unit maintains a number of databases: the Anonymous Letter File, the Bank Robbery Note File, the National Fraudulent Check File, and the Watermark File.
