"During the past two decades, the individualization of dried blood has become one of the most exciting and promising research areas in forensic science."-Saferstein, Richard. Criminalistics: An Introduction to
Forensic Science
 During the early 1900s, the discovery was made that the red blood cells in one human are not necessarily the same as the red blood cells in another human. Three types of protein-markers (also called agglutinogens) were discovered on the surface of red blood cells. The variable used to identify each of the three protein markers was A, B, and Rh+. Your blood type is determined by the protein-marker(s) found on your red blood cells; the protein markers you are born with are inherited from the genes from your parents. If you ever require a blood transfusion, the compatibility of the blood given is very important.You can have either the A and B protein markers independently (type A or type B) or in combination (type AB) or, interestingly, you may have neither (type O). In addition to the A and B protein markers, the Rh+ protein marker must be taken into account. If the Rh+ protein marker is present, you are considered to be (+), and if you do not have the Rh+ protein marker you are considered to be (-).The chart below lists various blood types as well as which types of blood are compatible.Blood typeCompatible with...Incompatible with…A+A-, O+, O-B protein markersA-O-B and Rh+ protein markersB+B-, O+, O-A protein markersB-O-A and Rh+ protein markersAB+AB-, A+, A-, B+, B-NoneAB-A-, B-, O-Rh+ protein markersO+O-A and B protein markersO-O-A, B and Rh+ protein markersFor forensic scientists, determining the blood type of a sample recovered from a crime scene helps to narrow the field of suspects by either implicating suspects with the same blood type or eliminating any suspects who do not have the blood type identified.Certain percentages of any given population have certain blood types. For example, in North America, 42% have blood type A, about 46% have blood type O, 9% have blood type B, and blood type AB is the least common at 3%. Blood type identification does not by itself prove that a blood sample belongs to a particular suspect because others may also have the same blood type. However, it helps to shorten the list of suspects. To further prove that a blood sample came from a particular individual, a DNA analysis of the blood sample is required.Chemical substances called ‘anti-serums’ determine blood type. The three types of anti-serums are anti-serum A, anti-serum B, anti-serum Rh+. Each identifies one of the three protein-markers that exist on the surface of red blood cells (A, B, Rh+). To determine the blood type of a sample anti-serum is added and if an agglutination reaction occurs (precipitate forms causing cloudiness) a positive test for the that protein-marker has occurred.Steps in Determing the Blood Type of an Unknown SampleExample 1:Three separate small samples of the blood being tested are created.A drop of anti-serum A is added and mixed into sample #1.A drop of anti-serum B is added and mixed into sample #2.A drop of anti-serum Rh+ is added and mixed into sample #3.Each sample is mixed gently for 1 to 3 minutes.Cloudiness is observed in sample #1. The formation of a precipitate in sample #1 indicates a positive agglutination reaction has occurred.No reaction has been observed in sample #2 and #3.Conclusion: The unknown blood sample is type A-.Example 2:Three separate small samples of the blood being tested are created.A drop of anti-serum A is added and mixed into sample #1.A drop of anti-serum B is added and mixed into sample #2.A drop of anti-serum Rh+ is added and mixed into sample #3.Each sample is mixed gently for 1 to 3 minutes.Cloudiness is observed in all three samples. The formation of a precipitate in samples #1, #2 and #3 indicates a positive agglutination reaction has occurred in all three samples.Conclusion: The unknown blood sample is type AB+.Blood EnzymesA number of unique enzymes and proteins in human blood can help to further identify the source of blood evidence. Just as each blood type is found in a certain percentage of the population, so too are these unique blood enzymes and proteins. Finding one or more of these enzymes or proteins using various chemical tests helps forensic experts to prove further the identity of an individual. One drawback to this technique is that these enzymes and proteins begin to decompose after they are released from the body. Therefore, the fresher the blood, the greater likelihood that these enzymes or proteins will be found.
