Blood Splatter Evidence
Blood is one of the most visible and useful (yet disturbing) types of physical evidence that can be left at a crime scene. Varying amounts of blood are typically left behind by the victim and/or the suspect at the scene of a violent crime.
The pattern that blood leaves behind on a surface can be interpreted, helping investigators to learn more about the crime itself. Blood that is left behind at a crime scene and later interpreted by forensics experts is called blood spatter  or blood stain evidence.
The two best ways of interpreting blood spatter/stain evidence is through direct analysis of the blood at the scene of the crime and/or through careful study of crime scene photographs. It takes experience and extensive training to become an expert in blood spatter/stain analysis, however this type of knowledge can prove to be very useful in criminal investigations.
Information that can be determined from blood spatter evidence includes:
origin(s) of the blood.
type and direction of impact that produced the blood stain/spatter.
position of victim(s) and/or suspect(s) involved.
movement and direction of victim and/or assailant after the initial assault.
Surface TextureBlood will ‘free-fall’ when gravitational forces cause blood to separate and fall from its source. The gravitational force must exceed the surface tension of the blood in order for it to 'free-fall'.  (Surface tension is caused by the molecular cohesive forces within a compound).  Examples of situations where blood free-falls includes open wounds, blood-soaked clothing, or dripping from weapon surface.
When a free-falling droplet of blood strikes a horizontal surface it will create a CIRCULAR blood stain. However, how circular it appears depends upon the surface - the smoother the horizontal surface the more circular the bloodstain surface will be (eg. glass vs. cement).  In general, the harder and less porous the surface, the less the blood will spatter.
Control experiments on identical (or similar) surfaces must be conducted to determine distance of spatter, direction etc.
In general, the greater the distance that blood free-falls, the greater the size of the circular blood stain pattern and the more cast-off residue (spatter) evident.
Direction of TravelThe blood's direction of travel after impact can be determined based on the stain's shape.  The pointed end of the bloodstain will always face its direction of travel.  In the top bloodstain pattern on the right, we can determined that the droplets of blood were moving from left to right.
Angle of Impact
When blood impacts a surface, the degree of circular distortion (i.e. how un-circular the blood is) is an indicator of the trajectory of the blood before it hit the object.
As the angle of the surface decreases, the less circular and greater in length the blood stain will be.  The image below shows examples of this effect.
Origin of the BloodWhen a force acts upon an exposed source of blood, it is broken up into many small droplets due to the energy applied to it. The greater the impact/force, the smaller the size of the blood droplets and the greater the number of blood droplets left behind. Therefore, getting hit several times by a human fist (a medium-velocity impact) will leave behind fewer but larger blood stains as opposed to being struck by a bullet (a high-velocity impact).
The site of origin of the blood can often be determined by drawing straight lines through the long axis of several individual bloodstains.  The intersection (or point of convergence) of the lines represents the point from which the blood originated.  The image on the right demonstrates this.
