Experiment 1

Short-term vs. Long-term Latent Fingerprint Samples

33 Marks

PURPOSE

	Compare the quality of fingerprint impressions exposed to heat, cold, and moisture for varying lengths of time. 



MATERIALS

	Water

	Scissors

	Tweezers

	Paper Towel

	Aluminum Foil

	Masking Tape and Pen

	6 containers such as drinking cups/glasses, plastic ‘Tupperware’ containers

	Camera – Take pictures of your lab to hand in with this work.



PROCEDURE1. Cut out six small squares of aluminum foil approximately 2cm x 3cm each.



2. Use a paper towel carefully to clean the shiny side of each square. Try not to touch the squares after they have been cleaned. Use your tweezers to set the squares aside.



3. Use a piece of masking tape and a pen to label each of your six containers with the following:

Short-term sample – water

Long-term sample  - water 

Short-term sample – cold

Long-term sample – cold

Short-term sample – heat

Long-term sample – heat



4. ‘Oil’ one of your fingers by rubbing it on your forehead or the side of your nose. Now press this finger onto one of the squares of aluminum; set this print aside. Again, ‘oil’ your finger and repeat this step using each of your six squares.



5. Half fill with tap water the containers labeled short-term sample – water and long-term sample – water. 



6. Use tweezers to submerge one of your aluminum squares into the container labeled short-term sample – water.



7. Allow this sample to be submerged for 5 minutes. Then, remove the aluminum square using the tweezers. Record your observations and set this print aside on a piece of paper marked short-term sample – water. 



8. Use your tweezers to place a second print inside the second container labeled long-term sample – water. Leave this sample in the water for 24 hours.



9. Use tweezers and place another of your squares into a container labeled short-term sample – cold. Then, place this sample in the water for 24hours. 



10. Allow this sample to remain in the refrigerator for 5 minutes. Then, remove it with the tweezers. Record your observations, and return the print to its container. 



11. Use tweezers and place another of your squares into the container labeled short-term sample – heat. Then, expose this sample to a safe heat source and warm it. (Like a hair dryer) You could place it in the sun or on top of the furnace vent. 



12. Allow this sample to remain exposed to some form of safe heat for 5 minutes. Then, remove it with tweezers. Record your observations and then return the print to its container. 



13. Repeat steps #9 through #12, but place each square in the two remaining containers labeled long-term sample. Now, expose these two samples to cold and heat for 24 hours. 



14. After 24 hours, observe the remaining three fingerprints samples you created by going to a well-lit area and holding each square at an angle with tweezers. 



15. Latent prints should be visible on each sample because of the highly reflective properties of the aluminum foil. 



16. Immediately after completing your visual observations, answer the following Related Questions below. 



Related Questions



Describe the appearance of each sample fingerprint. Consider shape, clarity, colour, etc.  (12)

SAMPLE

Heat

Cold

Water

Short-Term (5 min)











Long-Term (24 hr)













Were some fingerprint impressions more visible than others? Explain. (4)













Why were tweezers necessary for this experiment? (2)











Why was aluminum foil rather than paper used in this experiment? (2)











What concept does this experiment reinforce about latent fingerprints? How could this simple demonstration apply to forensic investigations? (3)













Photos taken throughout your lab. (10)
