The Zodiac Killer: Fingerprint Evidence
One of the most interesting aspects to this case is the substantial amount of fingerprint evidence collected from the letters sent by the Zodiac Killer and from the attacks themselves. Despite this evidence, no successful fingerprint matches have been made.
Fingerprint Evidence Collected:
Latent fingerprints were found in and on the car of Cheri Jo Bates.
A latent fingerprint was enhanced on a letter sent by the Zodiac Killer to the local police department after Cheri Jo Bates’ murder.
Latent fingerprints were found on a door handle of the car that Darlene Ferrin and Mike Mageau were in on the night of their attack.
A latent fingerprint was found on the envelope of a letter sent to local police after the murder of Darlene Ferrin and attempted murder of Mike Mageau.
Five latent fingerprints were found on letters sent to two local newspapers after the murder of Darlene Ferrin and the attempted murder of Mike Mageau.
Thirty-eight latent fingerprints and three latent palm prints were submitted to the FBI crime lab by the local police after the murder of Cecelia Shepard and attempted murder of Bryan Hartnell .
Three latent fingerprints were found on a greeting card sent to the San Francisco Chronicle in early November after the Paul Stine murder. (DNA was recovered from saliva on the stamp of this card).
The Zodiac Killer: Current Status
Despite decades of investigation by four police departments, the California Department of Justice, the US Postal Service, and the FBI, the Zodiac Killer has not been identified. Over 2 500 people have been considered as suspects in this case, and the original investigators have all retired.
This case has not been officially closed due to the multiple pieces of evidence collected that could identify the suspect, such as eye witness accounts, fingerprints, palm prints, and DNA. No one knows if the Zodiac Killer is still alive. According to the police, no letters have been sent from the Zodiac Killer since 1974.
