Chapter 14  The Continuance of Human Life • MHR  487
the same way as HIV—through sexual 
contact or through other contact with 
infected body ﬂ uids or blood. For this 
reason, hepatitis B is considered to be 
an STI. (See Figure 14.6.) Hepatitis C 
is transmitted through blood to blood 
contact with infected needles or syringes.
 
Each year, about 3000 Canadians are 
diagnosed with hepatitis B. Symptoms of 
the initial infection are ﬂ u-like, including 
fever, headache, nausea, loss of appetite, 
and abdominal pain. The skin of an 
infected person may become yellowish, a 
condition known as jaundice. A hepatitis 
B infection can progress to cause infection 
of the liver, leading to liver failure, liver 
cancer, and even death. Hepatitis viruses 
can cross the placenta to infect an unborn 
child. Some people recover completely. 
Others become asymptomatic—that is, 
they do not show any symptoms. 
Asymptomatic carriers can still, however, 
infect other people with the virus. 
 
Effective and safe vaccines for hepatitis 
A and B are available. The hepatitis B 
vaccine is administered routinely to babies 
in Canada. As well, physicians recommend 
vaccination for people who work in the 
health system and for people whose 
lifestyles put them at risk of infection.
2
  Describe how HIV leads to 
sickness and death in people 
who have AIDS.
2
  How is HIV transmitted?
2
  Compare the transmission of 
hepatitis A, B, and C.
• • •
• • •
Genital Herpes
Genital herpes is an extremely common 
viral STI. The Canadian health system 
does not maintain statistics on rates of 
herpes infection. Based on international 
data, however, researchers estimate that 
almost one in three sexually active people 
in Canada has genital herpes and this 
number is rising. (See Figure 14.7.)
 
Genital herpes is a viral STI that is 
caused by one of two herpes viruses: 
herpes simplex 1 (HSV 1) or herpes 
simplex 2 (HSV 2). HSV 2 is more likely 
to be acquired through genital contact, 
causing genital herpes. HSV 1 commonly 
causes infections of the mouth (such as 
cold sores), but also causes genital 
infections.
 
Once someone is infected with herpes, 
the symptoms usually appear within a 
month. The symptoms vary widely 
among individuals. The most common 
set of symptoms includes a tingling or 
itching in a particular area of the body, 
followed by the appearances of blisters. 
The most common areas of infection are 
the genitals, buttocks, and thighs, but the 
blisters can form anywhere on the body, 
even on internal tissues such as the 
urethra. The blisters rupture, causing 
painful sores that can take 5 to 20 days to 
heal. The outbreak may be accompanied 
by ﬂ u-like symptoms, such as swollen 
glands, aching joints, and fatigue. After 
the initial outbreak, the blisters may 
recur with varying frequency, or not at 
all. Fever, stress, sunlight, intercourse, or 
certain foods may trigger future outbreaks.
 
Along with the discomfort associated 
with herpes outbreaks, the herpes sores 
mean an increased risk of HIV infection. 
There is also a risk of transmission from 
an infected mother to her baby during 
birth. The resulting infection in the baby 
may cause blindness, neurological 
disorders, and even death. Physicians 
usually recommend that a mother with 
genital herpes give birth by Caesarean 
BiologyFile
 
FYI
The herpes simplex viruses 
are closely related to the 
viruses that cause chicken 
pox and mononucleosis.
Figure 14.7  
A photomicrograph of the 
herpes virus infecting a cell. 
Genital herpes infects one 
in five Americans and one 
in two people in some less 
industrialized countries. 
Despite over 20 years of 
research and promising, 
but inconclusive, clinical 
trials, a successful vaccine 
remains elusive.
