490  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
the skin, but it generally appears on the 
palms of the hands and the soles of the 
feet. Any contact with the infected 
person may spread the infection. 
 
During the third stage, the infection 
begins to affect the cardiovascular and 
nervous systems. An infected person may 
become mentally ill, blind, or lame, and 
may develop heart disease. Large, 
destructive ulcers called gummas may 
develop on the skin or internal organs. 
 
During any stage, syphilitic bacteria 
can infect a developing embryo, causing 
birth defects or stillbirth.
 
If the disease is not treated early, the 
bacteria can cause permanent damage. 
Fortunately, syphilis is readily diagnosed 
and can be treated effectively with 
antibiotics, including penicillin. Health 
professionals are concerned, however, 
that both risky sexual behaviour and lack 
of awareness are contributing to new 
regional outbreaks of syphilis.
2
  Use a table to compare the causes 
and treatments for chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, and syphilis.
• • •
• • •
Table 14.5  Preventing Transmission of STIs
Way to prevent 
transmission
Description
abstinence
Not engaging in any sexual activity is the only sure 
protection against all STIs.
long-term 
monogamous 
relationships
Relationships with the same partner are generally safe, if 
neither partner has an STI. Some STIs, such as HPV, can be 
dormant for many years before symptoms appear, however. 
Many people who have STIs are not aware of their infection.
condoms
Using male or female condoms can reduce, but does not 
eliminate, the risk of STI transmission.
personal 
responsibility
Personal responsibility is crucial. Safe sexual practices include 
not using alcohol or drugs, which can impair self-control or 
personal judgment. Sexual practices that are known to 
increase the risk of STI transmission include having multiple 
partners or partners who use intravenous drugs. Any 
practices that involve contact between the genitals and the 
mouth or rectum also increase the risk of STI transmission. 
Controlling the Spread 
of STIs in Canada
Many cases of STIs go undiagnosed 
simply because people are not aware of 
the signiﬁ cance of their symptoms. When 
people know the symptoms of STIs, they 
are more likely to be tested and treated 
before they infect others. For this reason, 
health practitioners stress education and 
awareness programs as an essential part 
of controlling the spread of STIs. Since 
many people carry STIs without 
knowing it, health practitioners also 
stress the importance of personal 
responsibility for safe sex practices. Table 
14.5 provides some examples of ways 
that people can protect themselves from 
STI transmission. STIs can lead to very 
serious diseases, but they are preventable.
Section 14.2 Summary
• Sexual intercourse can be a way of 
transmitting infections from one 
person to another. 
• Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) 
may have a variety of effects, from 
temporary discomfort to permanent 
damage of the reproductive system and 
other body systems. Some STIs can 
be fatal. 
• STIs may be caused by viral and 
bacterial infection. 
• Common viral STIs include HIV/
AIDS, hepatitis B, genital herpes, and 
human papilloma virus (genital warts). 
• Common bacterial STIs include 
chlamydia, gonorrhea and syphilis. 
For many of these STIs, young people 
show the highest rates of infection.
• One of the greatest challenges in 
controlling the spread of STIs is that 
many people who are infected show 
no symptoms. These people may 
unknowingly pass the infection on 
to other individuals. 
• Education, awareness, and responsible 
practices are important elements of 
public health strategies for prevention 
and treatment of STIs.
