Chapter 14  The Continuance of Human Life • MHR  491
In Canada, the rate of infection for several STIs is highest 
among teenagers and young adults. In the coming years, 
many of these people will want to start families. What do 
young people need to know about how STIs can affect 
their bodies? What strategy would you design to reach 
this audience? 
Procedure
 1. In your group, choose one STI that will be the focus of 
your education program. 
 2. Use print and Internet resources to learn about the STI 
you chose. In particular, ﬁ nd out what effects the STI can 
have on the male and female reproductive systems. ICT
ICT
 3. Organize your ﬁ ndings in a written report. Your report 
should include the following information:
 
 • the cause of the STI
 
 • the effects of the STI on the human body and, in 
particular, the male and female reproductive systems
 
 • why young adults are the age group at greatest risk for 
aquiring an STI
 
 • the issues and challenges involved in preventing and 
controlling the transmission of the STI
 4. Using the information in your report, develop an 
education program aimed at young people. Decide on 
the two or three most important messages. Then decide 
how you will deliver these messages. For example, you 
could create print advertisements for a magazine, 
produce a music video, or write and perform a play. 
Deliver your presentation to your class. ICT
ICT
Analysis 
 1. Which STIs are most likely to disrupt the function of the 
human reproductive system?
 2. Which STIs are most likely to cause permanent damage 
to the human reproductive system?
 3. Which education program do you think was the most 
effective? What made it effective?
 4. What do you think are the most serious challenges for 
health practitioners who want to reach young people in 
Canada? What could be done to meet these challenges?
Extension
 5. Some strategies to control the spread of STIs raise social 
and ethical issues. For example, some people argue that 
people should be able to test themselves for STIs in the 
privacy of their own homes. Other people believe that 
tests should always be conducted in a health clinic so 
that the results can be recorded. Working with a partner, 
choose an ethical issue associated with STIs. Prepare a 
short debate to argue both sides of the issue. What did 
you conclude? 
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
14.1
STIs: What To Know 
and How To Know It
T a r g e t  S k i l l s
Planning a strategy to communicate 
effectively information about sexually 
transmitted infections to a teenage 
audience
Working cooperatively to research and 
communicate ﬁ ndings about damage to 
the reproductive systems caused by STIs
 1. Give two examples of viral STIs and two examples of 
bacterial STIs.
 2. What is pelvic inﬂ ammatory disease, and why is it 
a concern?
 3. In what ways can a woman who is infected with an STI 
present a health risk to her baby? Give three examples.
 4. Some people who become infected with an STI may 
show no symptoms. 
a) How does this present a risk to the health of the 
infected individual?
b) How does this present a public health risk?
 5. A friend says to you, “viral STIs are always more serious 
than bacterial STIs, because they are not curable.” How 
would you respond? Include speciﬁ c examples to 
support your argument.
 6. Programs that are designed to teach young people about 
STIs are often controversial. Many people believe that 
young people should be taught to abstain entirely from 
sexual contact. Other people believe that young people 
should be taught about safe sex practices. 
 
 a) List two arguments that could be made on each side 
of this issue. 
 
 b) Is it possible for health practitioners to design 
education campaigns that respect both views? 
Explain your ideas in an editorial. ICT
ICT
Review
Section  14.2
