Chapter 14  The Continuance of Human Life • MHR  499
symptoms of menopause, the treatment 
also carries a number of health risks. In 
recent studies, hormone replacement 
therapy has been linked to
• an increased risk of coronary heart 
disease, strokes, and blood clots
• an increased risk of breast cancer 
and colorectal cancer
• an increased risk of dementia
 
For this reason, Health Canada 
advises that a woman should not begin 
hormone replacement therapy without 
a thorough medical evaluation and a 
careful assessment of her own particular 
needs, health, and medical history. In 
some cases, the beneﬁ ts of the therapy 
may outweigh the risks. In other cases, 
the reverse is true. Scientists continue 
to search for other ways to alleviate the 
symptoms and long-term health effects 
of menopause.
Section 14.3 Summary
• Sex hormones work to stimulate the 
development of male and female 
reproductive systems and regulate the 
function of the mature reproductive 
system.
• Human babies are born with complete 
but immature reproductive systems. At 
puberty, an increase in production of 
GnRH by the hypothalamus stimulates 
the release of FSH and LH in the 
anterior pituitary. These hormones, 
in turn, trigger the development of 
gametes and the release of sex hormones. 
• In males, the main sex hormone is 
testosterone. In females, the main sex 
hormones are estrogen and progesterone. 
• In addition to their effect on the 
reproductive system, the sex hormones 
act throughout the body to cause 
the development of secondary sex 
characteristics. 
• In the male reproductive system, a 
negative feedback hormone system 
maintains a relatively constant level 
of sperm production and testosterone. 
• In females, hormone systems interact 
to regulate a monthly menstrual cycle. 
• The menstrual cycle combines events 
in the ovary and in the uterus to 
maximize the chance of a zygote 
successfully implanting in the uterus 
for development into a fetus. 
For many years, doctors in North America routinely 
prescribed estrogen, or a combination of estrogen and 
progesterone, to help alleviate the symptoms of menopause. 
In 2000, the U.S.-based National Institutes of Health began a 
detailed investigation of the effects of hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT). Researchers stopped the study several years 
early, however, when they found that HRT was associated 
with a signiﬁ cant increase in the risk of strokes, heart disease, 
and breast cancer among their test subjects. The ﬁ ndings led 
scientists to look for a safer alternative to HRT. 
Procedure
 1. Using print or Internet resources, research two or three 
different kinds of therapies available to women who 
want to alleviate the symptoms of menopause. ICT
ICT
 2. For each of the therapies you are studying, gather 
information about 
 
 • how the treatment affects cells and tissues in the body
 
 • how the treatment affects hormone feedback systems 
 
 • any known health risks and beneﬁ ts
 3. Organize the information you have gathered. Create 
a short report or presentation to summarize and 
communicate your ﬁ ndings. ICT
ICT
Analysis
 1. Based on your research, is it possible to claim that one 
of these therapies is better than the others? 
 2. Many people argue that women should never have been 
prescribed hormone replacement therapy in the years 
before the NIH study was completed. Do you agree? 
What, if anything, should health practitioners and 
pharmaceutical companies have done differently?
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
14.4
Therapy Options for Menopause
T a r g e t  S k i l l s
Identifying physiological and ethical 
concerns about the medical use of 
reproductive hormones
Researching and assessing the 
medical use of reproductive hormones 
and their effects
