Chapter 14
504  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
Understanding Concepts
 1. Name the structures within a testis, and describe their 
functions.
 2. In which part of the body are each of the following 
produced?
 
 a) testosterone
 
 b) progesterone
 
 c) sperm
 
 d) luteinizing hormone
 
 e) follicle stimulating hormone
 
 f) ovum
 3. Outline, in the form of a labelled sketch or ﬂ ow chart, 
the path of a sperm cell from its formation to the 
moment it reaches an ovum. In your answer, identify 
all the male and female structures through which the 
sperm travels. ICT
ICT
 4. List three of the components of semen, and brieﬂ y 
explain what these ﬂ uids contribute to reproductive 
function.
 5. Construct a table or graphic organizer to compare and 
contrast the source, common modes of transmission, 
effects, and treatments for the following sexually 
transmitted infections. ICT
ICT
 
 a) HIV/AIDS
 
 b) hepatitis B
 
 c) genital herpes
 
 d) human papilloma virus
 
 e) chlamydia
 
 f) gonorrhea
 
 g) syphilis
 6. a) How would a newborn child acquire an infection 
of chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, and herpes?
 
 b) What effects do these STIs have on infants?
 7. What are the health risks and treatment options 
associated with each of the infections in question 5?
 8. Describe the stages of development of a follicle within 
an ovary.
 9. Describe the changes in the endometrium through the 
stages of the menstrual cycle.
 10. Compare the levels of sex hormones in the blood of a 
female before and after the onset of puberty, and describe 
how these changes affect the reproductive system.
 11. The following graph represents the average blood 
concentration of four circulating hormones collected 
from 50 healthy adult women who were not pregnant. 
Use the graph to answer the following questions:




8dcXZcigVi^dc^cWaddY
9Vnd[XnXaZ
 
 a) Which line represents luteinizing hormone?
 
 b) Which line represents progesterone?
 
 c) Which hormone increases during the last half of the 
menstrual cycle?
 
 d) Suggest a hormone that the green line might represent.
Applying Concepts
 12. Penicillin is an antibiotic that effectively cures syphilis. 
Explain why penicillin would be ineffective against AIDS.
 13. Describe the effect you would expect to see in a human 
male whose sperm cells have no acrosome.
 14. Do the names “follicle stimulating hormone” and 
“luteinizing hormone” correspond to their function 
in the human reproductive system? Give examples to 
justify your answer.
 15. Young female athletes often experience delayed puberty. 
What would you expect to ﬁ nd if you compare the 
blood hormone levels of a fourteen-year-old gymnast 
with those of less athletic girls of the same age?
 16. Farmers who maintain stocks of large animals often 
castrate the males. Based on the hormonal control 
of the male reproductive system, explain the likely 
physiological and behavioral effects of castration. 
What advantages does castration offer to the farmer?
 17. A young woman tells her doctor that she is experiencing 
irregular menstrual periods.
 
 a) Hypothesize some possible causes of the irregularity.
 
 b) Design an investigation that could test for one of 
these causes.
