524  MHR • Unit 6  Reproduction and Development
Teratogens are agents that cause developmental or physical 
abnormalities through ingesting (or inhaling) them or 
through exposure to them. In some cases, however, not being 
exposed to a substance or receiving inadequate amounts of 
it can also result in physical or developmental abnormalities. 
This is certainly true of nutrition during (as well as before and 
after) prenatal development. Inadequate intake of one nutrient 
in particular, folic acid (vitamin B9, also called folate), can 
have devastating consequences for embryonic development. 
In this investigation, you will use an abstract from a medical 
journal as the starting point for further study on the impact 
of folic acid on neural tube defects. (Neural tube defects, or 
NTDs, result when the neural tube—refer to page 514—does 
not close by about the twenty-eighth day. This leaves open 
an area of the spine from which nervous tissue protrudes, 
usually causing paralysis from the site downward.)
Procedure
 1. Read the abstract below, which was published in Clinical 
and Investigative Medicine in 1996. You may need to look 
some words up in a print or electronic dictionary. Even 
if you do not understand every word or some of the 
sentences, you should still be able to “pick out” the 
general meaning or signiﬁ cance of what the authors 
of the journal article are saying. ICT
ICT
 2. Using print or electronic resources, conduct further 
research on neural tube defects to ﬁ nd out the 
following. ICT
ICT
 
 • what kind of defects can occur, how often they 
occur statistically in Alberta and/or Canada, their 
characteristics/symptoms, and what, if any, treatments 
are available for them
 
 • why Canada’s health agency was reluctant to advise 
fortifying foods with folic acid, and the current status 
of folic-acid fortiﬁ cation
 
 • actions taken on the part of Health Canada to inform 
the public about folic acid and NTDs
Analysis
 1. What is the recommended daily amount of folic acid 
for women who could become pregnant?
 2. When should women who could become pregnant start 
taking folic acid?
 3. Why is dietary (unsupplemented) intake of folic acid 
considered to be inadequate to prevent NTDs?
 4. What other risk factors are involved in having a baby 
with an NTD?
 5. In your opinion, based on what you have discovered 
through your research, should the Canadian 
government have acted more quickly when the link 
between folic acid and neural tube disorders was 
established and communicated in the scientiﬁ c 
community? Give reasons to justify your opinion.
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
15.1
Folic Acid and Neural Tube Defects
T a r g e t  S k i l l s
Investigating the effects of folic acid 
on embryonic and fetal development
Discussing the societal impact of folic 
acid consumption on fetal development
Abstract
Objectives: To determine the diffusion of information 
about preventing neural tube defects (NTDs) through folic 
acid consumption by examining whether mothers of 
Canadian children born with spina biﬁ da, who had become 
pregnant at least a year after evidence of the preventive 
effect of folic acid had been published, had taken sufﬁ cient 
amounts of folic acid in the periconceptional period [that is, 
the ﬁ rst few weeks of pregnancy] and were aware of this 
important new information.
Design: Validated food-frequency questionnaire to assess 
folate intake.
Setting: The Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto between 
Jan. 4 and Aug. 16, 1994.
Participants: Thirty mothers whose infants were being 
treated for spina biﬁ da.
Main outcome measures: The mothers’ mean folate intake 
and knowledge about the protective effect of folic acid; 
demographic and health information.
Results: The mothers’ mean folate intake was 0.182 mg/d 
(standard deviation 0.076 mg/d, range 0.02 to 0.53 mg/d), 
less than half the protective dose. Only 4 (13%) of the 
mothers had been aware of the relation between 
nutritional folate and NTDs when they conceived, but even 
they did not supplement their diets with sufﬁ cient folic 
acid. The medical data showed that, in addition to the 
failure of primary prevention of NTDs, secondary 
prevention through diagnostic tests during pregnancy 
were also inadequate.
Conclusions: Our study, one of the ﬁ rst to be conducted 
after the role of folate in preventing NTDs was conﬁ rmed, 
reveals that, in one of the most advanced countries in the 
world, this new information has had no effect on patients’ 
folate intake. Unless food is fortiﬁ ed with folate, the 
estimated 400 to 800 annual cases of NTDs in Canada 
will not be prevented.
Source: Clin Invest Med 1996; 19 (3): 195–201
