

Chapter Concepts
4.1   Adaptation,   Variation,   
and Natural Selection
•
   Sexual reproduction and inherited 
mutations contribute to variation 
among individuals in populations.
•
   Individuals in a population have 
a selective advantage over other 
individuals if their mutations allow 
them to better survive and reproduce 
under selective pressures.
4.2   Developing   a   Theory   
to Explain Change
•
   Fossil evidence shows that species 
change over time and that species 
eventually become extinct.
•
   To develop the theory of natural 
selection, which explains evolutionary 
change, scientists have gathered and 
organized many pieces of evidence.
•
   There is evidence that modern species 
evolved from ancestral forms.
4.3   How Species Form
•
   A species consists of reproductively 
compatible populations.
•
   New species can form when 
populations become reproductively or 
geographically isolated from each other.
•
   The process of adaptive radiation occurs 
when a common ancestor diversifi es 
into a variety of species.
•
   Two models for the pace of evolution 
are gradualism and punctuated 
equilibrium.
T
here are about 4000 cockroach species worldwide. The fossil in 
this photograph shows a 9 cm-long cockroach (Arthropleura
pustulatu
s) that lived 300 million years ago. It was more than twice
the size of the American cockroach 
(Periplaneta americana), a species
common today. It was preserved so well that its mouthparts and
antennae, and even the veins in its wings, are visible. When this
cockroach was alive, there was agreater diversity of life forms thanr
there is today. Fossils have helped to shape our current ideas about
the process b
y which organisms that are living today descended from 
ancient forms of life and changed with the passing of time. Using fossil 
evidence, observations of species, experimentation with laboratory 
populations, and modern techniques, such as genetic analysis,
scientists are adding to our understanding of life on Earth.
Mechanisms of 
Population Change
4
CHAPTER
112    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
1 3296_Chapter_04_Opener.indd   11 3296_Chapter_04_Opener.indd   111/4/06   5:36:02 PM11/4/06   5:36:02 PM

Could Cockroaches Rule Earth?
Procedure
   1.  Read the paragraph below, and answer the 
questions that follow.
Cockroaches live in many different habitats throughout 
the world. They are particularly hardy. They are able 
to survive without food for several weeks and have a 
varied diet, which can include unusual items such as 
wallpaper paste and paint. The females can reproduce 
several times a month, once they are reproductively 
mature. (Female American cockroaches live for about 
14 months and lay their fi  rst egg capsule at about one 
year of age.)
Analysis
   1.  One female American cockroach can lay an egg 
capsule containing 16 eggs every fi  ve days. If a female 
is reproductive for two months, approximately how 
many offspring will she produce?
   2.   a)  If half of the cockroach’s offspring are female, 
and all of them reproduce, how many offspring 
will they produce? (Show your calculations.)
              b)  Do you think this is a realistic situation? Explain.
   3.  While some cockroach species are abundant in 
certain areas, cockroaches are not “taking over the 
world.” With a partner, discuss what you think 
might limit their populations. (Hint: Review what  
you learned in Chapter 3 about the factors that 
limit populations.)
   4.  People often use insecticides to kill cockroaches. In 
some cases, however, using insecticides can result 
in populations of insects that are resistant to—not 
harmed by—the very insecticide they are exposed 
to. Then, the insecticide is no longer able to control 
the insect populations by killing individuals. How 
do you think insecticide-resistance in a population 
might happen? 
Launch Lab
This reconstruction of an ancient tropical forest shows 
the type of habitat in which cockroaches, and many other 
insect species, first appeared over 300 million years ago.
Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   
113
1 3296_Chapter_04_Opener.indd   21 3296_Chapter_04_Opener.indd   211/4/06   5:36:05 PM11/4/06   5:36:05 PM

114    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
Adaptation, Variation, 
and Natural Selection
4.1
SECTION
Organisms, such as the bighorn sheep in 
Figure 4.1, constantly face environmental 
challenges that limit populations. Severe 
weather, drought, famine, and competition 
for food, space, and mates are all challenges 
that organisms may or may not be able to 
overcome. Organisms that survive long 
enough to reproduce have the opportunity 
to pass along to their offspring the genetic 
information that helped them survive. 
In this section, you will learn how 
variation within species, and organisms’ 
interactions with their environment, 
help to explain changes in populations 
from one generation to another.
Adaptations and Survival
The American bittern, Figure 4.2, is 
found in marshes and fi elds in Alberta, 
where it lives among grasses and reeds. 
The colouring of its plumage helps to 
camoufl  age the bittern so that it blends 
in with its environment. As with other 
species, the bittern’s adaptations make it 
well-suited to its habitat. An adaptation 
is a structure, behaviour, or physiological 
process that helps an organism survive 
and reproduce in a particular environment. 
Camoufl  age is one such adaptation. 
Another adaptation is the biochemical 
and body processes of a Richardson’s 
ground squirrel in hibernation (for 
example, physiology such as reduced 
heart and breathing rate). The needle-
sharp talons and excellent vision of 
an owl are structural adaptations that 
make owls excellent predators in their 
environment. The thick, leathery leaves 
of the buffaloberry are also structural 
adaptations. They help to reduce water 
loss on hot summer days, which are an 
abiotic feature of their environment.
Figure 4.2  The American bittern (Botaurus 
lentiginosus) is well-camouflaged among 
plants in its habitat. How could the colouration 
of individuals help the survival of a population?
Section Outcomes
In this section, you will 
• 
describe how sexual 
reproduction and changes 
in genetic information 
result in variation within 
populations
• 
design an investigation 
to measure variations in 
a population
• 
describe how some 
mutations may improve 
an individual organism’s 
chance for survival and 
reproduction
• 
defi  ne natural selection
Key Terms
variation
biological species
mutation
selective advantage
natural selection
selective pressure
Figure 4.1  No two organisms, even within the same species, are identical. Some differences, 
such as colour and size, are visible in the Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis) shown 
above. Other differences, such as resistance to a particular parasite or bacterial infection, are not 
visible, but all differences are examples of the variations among individuals in a population.
BiologyFile
 
FYI
The American bittern’s 
ability to conceal itself 
extends to its behaviour, as 
well. It stands so that the 
lines on its plumage match 
the reeds surrounding it. 
If the reeds are swaying 
in the breeze, the bittern 
also sways, mimicking the 
movement of the reeds.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   12 3296_Chapter_04.indd   111/4/06   5:36:12 PM11/4/06   5:36:12 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   115
 How do these adaptations develop? 
Adaptations are the result of a gradual 
change in the characteristics of members 
of a population over time. A variation—
a visible or invisible difference—that 
helps an individual in a population 
survive is likely to be passed on from 
survivor to survivor. Through generations 
of survivors, this variation will become 
more common, perhaps so common that 
it is considered to be a characteristic, or 
trait, of the population. Not all variations 
become adaptations. A variation in 
an individual can be an advantage or 
disadvantage, or have no effect on the 
individuals as they live and interact in 
their environment. 
2

  Sharks have an excellent sense 
of smell. Is this an adaptation? 
Explain your answer.
• • •
• • •
Variation within a Species
A biological species is a group of 
reproductively compatible populations. 
This means that members of these 
populations can interbreed and produce 
offspring that are healthy and are 
themselves able to reproduce successfully.
 You and your classmates are all the 
same species, but clearly there is a great 
deal of variety among the individuals in 
your class. Why? How does this variation 
arise? Offspring have a combination of 
genetic material from both parents. 
Through sexual reproduction, parents 
pass on distinct units of hereditary 
information (genes) to their offspring.
 The number of possible 
combinations of genes that offspring can 
inherit from their parents results in great 
genetic variation among individuals 
within a population. The kittens in 
Figure 4.3, for example, are all from the 
same litter, yet each has different fur 
colour and markings. The kittens look 
different because, through sexual 
reproduction, each kitten has inherited 
a different combination of genetic 
information from its parents. Some of 
this genetic information is expressed in 
each kitten’s physical appearance and 
behaviour. Other genetic information 
has no visible effect but remains part 
of each kitten’s genetic make-up and 
can be passed on to the next generation.
 Genetic variation in a population is 
due to the variety of genetic information 
in all individuals of the population. In 
the next investigation, you will measure 
variation within a population. 
2

  How does sexual reproduction 
lead to variation among 
individuals in a population?
• • •
• • •
Mutations Lead to Genetic Variation
Mutations are changes in the genetic 
material of an organism. Mutations 
happen continuously in the DNA of 
any living organism. They can occur 
spontaneously, when DNA is copied 
before a cell divides. For example, your 
own DNA has about 175 mutations, 
compared with your parents’ DNA, 
because of mistakes that occur as your 
Figure 4.3  In sexual 
reproduction, the genes 
from two parents combine 
to produce offspring with 
visible and non-visible 
variations in their 
charactertistics. The kittens 
(Felis domesticus) in this 
litter have different fur 
colour and patterns, partly 
because each kitten 
inherited a different 
combination of genetic 
information from its parents.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   22 3296_Chapter_04.indd   211/4/06   5:36:19 PM11/4/06   5:36:19 PM

116    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
Variations Great and Small
Diversity (variations) within a species can help populations 
survive environmental changes. Diversity within a species 
can be monitored genetically, or it can be demonstrated 
by measuring individuals within a population. Most traits 
in a population vary in a continuous way from one 
extreme to the other. A plot of the distribution of the trait 
in a population often produces a bell-shaped curve. In this 
investigation, you will design an experiment to measure a 
particular characteristic in two populations—plant seeds 
and humans.
Question
Are there measurable differences in size among 
individuals of the same species?
Hypothesis
Make and record a hypothesis about how a particular 
characteristic might be distributed throughout a 
population. (For example, would it be evenly distributed?)
Materials
•
  ruler  
•
  bean seeds or peas
•
  electronic  balance  
•
  graph  paper
Experimental Plan
   1.  With your group, design an investigation to determine 
the variation in the mass of plant seeds and a second 
investigation to determine the variation in the length 
of the human thumb or the width of the human hand.
   2.  State and record a hypothesis for each investigation.
   3.  As a group, decide how you will make the appropriate 
measurements and how many samples you will need. 
Also decide whether to pool your data with other 
groups. (Keep in mind that the larger the sample size, 
the more reliable the results are.)
   4.  Design a table similar to the one shown in the sample 
to record data for each investigation.
   5.  Identify the variables that you will control to ensure 
that your data are reliable.
   6.  Show your experimental plan to your teacher before 
beginning your investigation. 
Data and Observations
   1.  Conduct your investigations, and record your results.
   2.  Group the data into meaningful categories.
   3.  Pool data from other groups if required to produce 
meaningful results.
   4.  A frequency histogram is a representation of a 
frequency distribution by means of rectangles whose 
widths represent class intervals and whose areas are 
proportional to the corresponding frequencies. Use 
a computer and spreadsheet software to construct 
a frequency histogram of data collected. 
ICT
ICT
Sample Data Table and Histogram
Data 
Range 
(mm)Frequency
0–101
10–203
20–306
30–403
40–502
Analysis
   1.  Identify the range of the data that you collected for 
each investigation.
Conclusions
   2.  What can you conclude about the variations within 
a population? Is there a “typical” length or mass? Or 
is the frequency the same for each data range?
   3.  Would you get a greater or smaller variation in the 
range of data if all of the individuals sampled came 
from the same parents—for example, if all of the 
seeds you measured originated from the same plant?
   4.  What advantage would size (either large size or small 
size) have to the population studied? (For example, 
what advantage would large size have to a seed?)
4. A
INVESTIGATION
Target Skills
Designing an investigation to describe 
an inherited variation in a population
Gathering and recording data to 
demonstrate variation 
Stating a conclusion based on analysis 
of collected data




n
nnnn
;gZfjZcXn
9ViVGVc\Zbb
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   32 3296_Chapter_04.indd   311/4/06   5:36:21 PM11/4/06   5:36:21 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   117
DNA is copied. Mutagens, such as UV 
radiation, are environmental agents that 
can cause mutations in DNA, as well.
 When DNA mutates, a cell may 
exhibit new characteristics. You can see 
an example of this in Figure 4.4, which 
shows a healthy blood cell (A) and an 
abnormal, sickle-shaped red blood cell 
(B). Other possible results include the 
cell dying, malfunctioning, or multiplying 
more than it should, resulting in a cluster 
of cells that form a tumour. Some 
mutations will not appear to have any 
effect on a cell. Whatever the result, if 
the mutation occurs in a body (somatic) 
cell, the mutation disappears when the 
organism dies. If, however, the mutation 
alters the DNA in a gamete (reproductive 
cell), the mutation may be passed on to 
succeeding generations. For example, if 
the kittens in Figure 4.3 have mutations 
in their egg or sperm cells, these 
mutations could be passed on to their 
offspring. These mutations were not 
present in their parents’ DNA. Thus, 
mutations are a signifi  cant source of 
genetic variation in populations. 
Mutations Can Provide 
a Selective Advantage
Mutations that signifi cantly alter proteins 
in DNA often adversely affect the well-
being of an organism and can be harmful. 
In some instances, however, a mutation 
enables an organism to survive its 
environment better, which, in turn, 
means that the organism is more likely 
to survive and reproduce. This situation 
is more common when an organism’s 
environment is changing. Mutations 
that once were no advantage, or perhaps 
were even a disadvantage, may become 
favourable in a new environment. In 
this situation, the mutation provides 
a selective advantage in the new 
environment.
 As an example, there is a mutation in 
housefl  ies that makes them resistant to 
the insecticide DDT. This mutation also 
reduces the fl  ies’ growth rate. So, before 
the introduction of DDT to their 
environment, having this mutation would 
have been a disadvantage to the fl ies. When 
DDT was introduced, however, this 
mutation enabled the individuals that 
possessed it to survive. These fl ies had 
a selective advantage in the population. 
They were more likely to survive and 
reproduce, thus potentially passing on this 
now-helpful mutation to their offspring. 
 In another study, researchers found 
that populations of California ground 
squirrels that overlap the range of 
northern Pacifi  c rattlesnakes have a 
factor in their blood that makes them 
better able to combat the rattlesnakes’ 
venom. Ground squirrels with this factor 
are likely to be the ones that will survive 
Figure 4.4  Normal, healthy red blood cells are round and smooth. They pass easily through 
blood vessels. Sickled cells can stick in the blood vessels, resulting in blood clots and reduced 
blood flow to vital organs. People who inherit the mutated gene for sickled cells from both 
of their parents have a condition called sickle cell disease.
Scanning electron micrograph, magnification: 90 000 ×Scanning electron micrograph, magnification: 90 000 ×
AB
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Mutated genes can cause or 
contribute to some diseases, 
such as diabetes, heart 
disease, Huntington’s, 
cancer, and Alzheimer’s. 
Hereditary conditions can 
occur because a parent with 
the mutation can pass it to 
children. There are tests 
available and more being 
developed that can help 
doctors pinpoint the 
mutation and the disease. 
The goal of the research is 
to improve the ability to 
treat patients and prevent 
unwanted mutations from 
passing on to future 
generations.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   42 3296_Chapter_04.indd   411/4/06   5:36:22 PM11/4/06   5:36:22 PM

118    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
and reproduce, thus passing on the genes 
for this factor to their offspring. (In other 
words, the mutation that provided 
ground squirrels with the protection 
against snake venom gave those 
individuals a selective advantage.) As a 
result, in the future, a high proportion 
of the population will have the genetic 
make-up that allows them to withstand 
rattlesnake venom.
 In populations that reproduce 
quickly, such as bacteria, viruses, and 
many insects, a rapidly changing 
environment can result in populations 
that also become adapted fairly quickly. 
If the environment changes, the mutated 
form of a gene that was previously 
insignifi  cant in the population may 
provide a selective advantage to some 
individuals. As a result, the organisms 
that have the mutant form survive, and 
the genetic information is passed on to 
the next generation. In time, the gene 
that provided the selective advantage 
becomes more prevalent in the 
population. The once neutral or even 
negative mutation can, in some cases, 
mean the survival of a population. 
 For instance, populations of 
cockroaches can become adapted to new 
environments, such as those where they 
are sprayed with insecticides, relatively 
quickly. The cockroaches with a 
mutation that allows them to survive 
the insecticide can potentially pass this 
mutation onto their offspring. In the 
next generation, this mutation becomes 
more common in the population and 
more individuals in the population are 
resistant to the insecticide. Figure 4.5 
shows another species that can quickly 
become adapted to new environments 
because it reproduces so quickly. 
2

  Using a suitable example, 
distinguish between a mutation 
that provides a selective 
advantage and a mutation that 
provides a selective disadvantage.
• • •
• • •
Scanning electron micrograph, magnification: 16 000 ×
Figure 4.5  These Staphylococcus aureus cells 
appear to be identical, but some may have a 
mutation that makes them resistant to 
antibiotics.
Investigate this type of organism and its 
ability to adapt in the next Thought Lab.
Natural Selection
Natural selection is a process that results 
when the characteristics of a population 
of organisms change because individuals 
with certain inherited traits survive 
specifi  c local environmental conditions 
and, through reproduction, pass on their 
traits to their offspring. For natural 
selection to occur, there must be variety 
or diversity within a species. This is 
clearly what caused the antibiotic-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus you 
will study in Thought Lab 4.1. 
 In this population of bacteria, the 
bacteria that survived were selected for 
by their environment. They survived the 
change in the environment around them, 
which was the application of an antibiotic, 
and thus could reproduce and pass on 
the genetic information that coded for 
resistance to that particular antibiotic. 
Individuals did not change during their 
lifetime; rather, with the passage of time, 
the population changed in its ability to 
resist certain antibiotics. In other words, 
populations change, not individuals. An 
abiotic environmental condition can be 
said to select for certain characteristics 
in some individuals and select against 
different characteristics in other 
individuals. In this way, the environment 
exerts selective pressure on a population.
 For example, in a population of 
fi  nches, some of the birds may have 
BiologyFile
 
FYI
A person who receives the 
gene for sickled cells from 
both parents inherits sickle 
cell disease, which is 
harmful and can be life-
threatening. A person who 
receives the gene from only 
one parent, however, can 
benefi t from it. This is 
because people with a 
single copy of this gene are 
more resistant to malaria, an 
insect-borne disease that is 
one of the leading causes of 
illness and death in Africa.
BiologyFile
 
FYI
In natural selection, the 
environment selects for 
certain characteristics in a 
population. For centuries, 
however, people have been 
selecting organisms for 
particular traits. This is called 
artifi  cial  selection. Early 
indigenous peoples of 
Central America—ancestors 
of the peoples who would 
develop great cities such 
as those of the Olmec and 
Maya—developed the 
ancestral versions of the 
corn that we are familiar 
with today from one or 
more ancient grasses, 
including teosinte.
Modern corn kernel 
compared with teosinte
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   52 3296_Chapter_04.indd   511/4/06   5:36:24 PM11/4/06   5:36:24 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   119
wider beaks than others. If there is an 
environmental change that makes having 
a wide beak an advantage, these wide-
beaked fi  nches will be more likely to 
survive and pass on the genes for wide 
beaks to their offspring. In native grasses 
such as rough fescue, shown in Figure 4.6, 
individuals that have the ability to 
withstand drought will survive during 
conditions of sustained dry conditions. 
They will then pass on the trait for drought 
resistance to their offspring. In the next 
generation, the abundance of the trait 
for drought resistance will increase in 
the population, because more of the 
drought-resistant individuals survive to 
reproduce. Should there be a big increase 
in the moisture in the population of 
Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, shown in Figure 4.5 on the 
previous page, can cause painful ear infections in children 
and life-threatening infections in the wounds of surgery 
patients. Like many other micro-organisms, S. aureus bacteria 
reproduce quickly. They reproduce asexually by dividing as 
frequently as every 20 min. This can result in a single cell 
having close to a billion descendants in about 6 h. Because of 
these astounding reproductive rates, benefi  cial mutations in 
the population may increase in frequency very quickly. This 
phenomenally rapid asexual cloning of individuals that 
are resistant to the new environment (for example, to the 
antibacterial action of an antibiotic) makes it challenging 
for scientists to develop effective antibiotics.
Procedure
   1.  Review the data shown in the table. Based on the data, 
when is bacterial resistance to a particular antibiotic 
likely to occur in Staphylococcus aureus? 
   2.  Using different-coloured playing chips, model how a 
population of Staphylococcus aureus could become 
resistant to an antibiotic. (Hint: Use one colour of chip 
for bacteria that are resistant to an antibiotic.) 
Analysis
   1.  Explain how the following situation might lead to 
antibiotic resistance of Staphylococcus aureus in patients. 
  A patient is prescribed the antibiotic erythromycin for 
an infected cut. The prescription instructs the patient 
to take the antibiotic for two weeks. After one week, 
however, the cut seems to have cleared up and the 
patient stops taking the antibiotic. 
   2.  With a partner, choose one of the following questions to 
research. Prepare a written, oral, or computer presentation 
to share your fi ndings. 
ICT
ICT
  •
  How can the overuse of antibiotics lead to antibiotic 
resistance in bacteria? 
  •
  Why do some agricultural practices contribute to 
antibiotic resistance in some bacteria species, and how 
can this contribute to antibiotic resistance in bacteria 
that cause diseases in humans?
Historical Progression of Antibiotic Resistance of 
Staphylococcus aureus
Antibiotic
Ye a r
introduced
First reports of 
resistance in patients
penicillin19411945–1946
streptomycin19441945
tetracycline19481955
erythromycin19521950s
methicillin19611961
gentamicin19641976
ciprofl oxacin19881990
vancomycin19561997
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
4.1
Evolving “Superbugs”
Target Skills
Analyzing data and applying a 
conceptual model to show how 
antibiotic resistance could occur in a 
population of Staphylococcus aureus
Gathering and recording information 
about the rise of antibiotic resistance 
in bacteria
Figure 4.6  Three species of rough fescue, Foothills (Festuca campestris), 
Plains (Festuca hallii), and Northern (Festuca scabrella), cover approximately 
two thirds of Alberta. In fact, Alberta is the only place in North America where 
all three species grow naturally. In 2001, more than 2000 Albertans voted 
rough fescue as their favourite grass for a provincial emblem. The main reason 
given was its role as winter food for bighorn sheep, deer, elk, and bison.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   62 3296_Chapter_04.indd   611/4/06   5:36:30 PM11/4/06   5:36:30 PM

120    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
rough fescue’s environment, the trait for 
drought resistance will no longer be an 
advantage. In fact, if no individuals in 
the population can withstand extremely 
moist conditions, the population may 
not survive in that environment.
 Natural selection does not anticipate 
change in the environment. Instead, 
natural selection is situational. A trait that 
at one time seems to have no particular 
relevance to survival becomes the trait 
that later helps individuals in a population 
survive and reproduce in a changed 
environment. This trait then persists 
within a population, because it is inherited 
by the offspring of the survivors. 
Adaptations that are benefi  cial in one 
situation may be useless or detrimental 
in another situation. Complete the next 
Thought Lab to see how changing 
environmental conditions affected a 
fi  nch population over several years.
2

  Identify two examples, 
mentioned in this section, that 
show variation in a species being 
caused by a mutation.
2

  Explain how the ability of a 
population of insects to withstand 
the effects of an insecticide is an 
example of natural selection.
• • •
• • •
Rosemary and Peter Grant have been studying the medium 
ground fi nch (Geospiza fortis) of the Galápagos Islands for 
several decades. These fi  nches use their strong beaks to 
crush seeds. They prefer the small seeds that are abundant 
during wet years. Because fewer small seeds are produced 
during dry years, the fi  nches also have to eat larger seeds, 
which are harder to crush. For several years, the Grants have 
been measuring the depth (dimension from top to bottom) 
of the fi nches’ beaks.
The medium ground finch, Geospiza fortis







8]Vc\Zh^cWZV`YZei]d[<Zdhe^oV[dgi^h!&.,,·&.-)

WZV`YZei]bb
NZVg
Procedure
Use the questions below to interpret the graph.
Analysis
   1.  1977, 1980, and 1982 were drought years; 1984 was a 
wet year. What do you notice about the average beak 
depth in the fi  nch population during dry years 
compared with wet years?
   2.  How do the data relate to selective pressure and natural 
selection?
   3.  An observer suggested that the fi nches exercised their 
beaks more when they ate large seeds that were tough 
to open, making their beaks stronger. Evaluate the 
plausibility of this explanation for the graphed data.
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
4.2
Analyzing Changes in Beak Depth
Target Skills
Analyzing data to show how beak 
depth in the medium ground fi  nch 
changes with the passage of time
Stating and defending a 
generalization based on data
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   72 3296_Chapter_04.indd   711/4/06   5:36:32 PM11/4/06   5:36:32 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   121
Section 4.1 Summary 
•
  An adaptation is a physical feature, 
behaviour, or physiological process 
that helps an organism survive and 
reproduce in a particular environment. 
Examples of adaptations include 
camoufl  age, night vision, deep 
roots, nesting, and hibernation.
•
  Variety within a population and the 
environment in which an organism 
lives creates a situation in which 
natural selection can occur.
•
  Mutations and reproduction cause 
variations among individuals in a 
population.
•
  A mutation may provide an individual 
with an advantage or a disadvantage, 
or neither (neutral).
•
  Natural selection is the process by 
which a population of organisms 
changes because individuals with 
certain traits can better survive the 
local environmental conditions and 
pass on these traits to their offspring.
   1.  Identify  fi  ve adaptations of this grizzly bear that make 
it well suited for survival in its habitat.
   2.  Describe how variations occur in populations.
   3.  Using examples from this chapter, show how mutations 
and natural selection happen by chance.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Pumpkins
A gardener is trying to win a competition for the largest 
pumpkin. Every year, she saves the seeds from the largest 
pumpkin in her garden. The next year, she plants only 
those seeds in a large plot. She fi  nds that her pumpkins 
are becoming larger over the years.
   4.  a)  Explain whether there is selective pressure in this 
pumpkin population.
b)  Is this situation an example of natural selection? 
Justify your answer.
   5.  Evaluate the following statement: “Natural selection 
works like a newspaper copy editor; it works only with 
what is already present in a population.” [Note: Copy 
editors check written material, usually as the fi nal step 
before it is set into type, to correct errors in grammar, 
spelling, usage, and style.]
   6.  In a population of sparrows, most birds have a bill that 
is about 10 mm long. Some birds, however, have bills 
that are slightly longer or slightly shorter than average. 
Explain why this variation within a population is 
important when discussing natural selection.
   7.  Suppose that you are designing an investigation to 
measure variation within a population. Explain why 
it would not be appropriate to measure the length of 
100 leaves from the same tree.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Insect Resistant Pests
Pesticide resistance is a genetically based phenomenon. 
Resistance occurs when a pest population—insects, for 
instance—is exposed to a pesticide. When this happens, 
not all insects are killed. Those individuals that survive 
frequently have done so because they are genetically 
predisposed to be resistant to the pesticide.
Repeated applications and higher rates of the insecticide 
will kill increasing numbers of individuals, but some 
resistant insects will survive. The offspring of these 
survivors will carry the genetic makeup of their parents. 
These offspring, many of which will inherit the ability 
to survive the exposure to the insecticide, will become a 
greater proportion with each succeeding generation of 
the population.
   8.  Explain how some insects develop resistance to 
pesticides in terms of natural selection.
   9.  Explain what is meant by the expression “populations 
evolve, not individuals.”
Review
Section  4.1
BiologyFile
 
Web Link
Health professionals and 
scientists worldwide are 
concerned about the 
resistance of bacteria to 
antibiotics. Many share 
information and ideas in 
an attempt to slow this 
alarming trend. What 
practices do health 
professionals recommend 
to reduce the spread of 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria?
@
www
www.albertabiology.ca
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   82 3296_Chapter_04.indd   811/4/06   5:36:36 PM11/4/06   5:36:36 PM

122    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
4.2
SECTION
Developing a Theory 
to Explain Change
Scientifi  c knowledge develops as people 
observe the world around them, ask 
questions about their observations, 
and seek answers to their questions. A 
scientifi c hypothesis is a statement that 
provides one possible answer to a 
question, or one possible explanation for 
an observation. Hypotheses are tested to 
determine their validity, mainly through 
experiments, observation, developing 
models from data, or a combination of 
these. Hypotheses that consistently lead to 
successful predictions and explanations 
are sometimes synthesized into a general 
statement that explains and makes 
successful predictions about a broad 
range of observations. Such a statement 
is called a scientifi c theory.
 For centuries, people have been 
asking questions about how life developed 
on Earth. They have found objects (such 
as fossils), made observations (such as 
recognizing the natural variations in 
populations), collected and analyzed 
data, and formulated hypotheses to 
explain their observations. The resulting 
theory of evolution by natural selection 
is a well-supported, widely accepted 
explanation of how life has changed, 
and continues to change, during Earth’s 
history. In this section, you will survey 
key events in the development of this 
theory, as well as scientifi c observations 
that support it. 
Developing the Theory of 
Evolution by Natural Selection
Some ancient Greek philosophers 
believed that life evolved gradually. 
However, two of the most infl uential 
philosophers, Plato (427–347 
B.C.E.) 
and Aristotle (384–322 
B.C.E.), believed 
that all life existed in a perfected and 
unchanging form. This view of life 
prevailed in western culture for over 
2000 years. By the sixteenth century, 
the predominant philosophy in western 
culture was that all species of organisms 
had been created independently of one 
another and had remained unchanged 
ever since.
Buffon’s Histoire Naturelle
One of the fi  rst people to challenge 
publicly the idea that life forms are 
unchanging was French naturalist 
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon 
(1707–1788). In 1749, he published the 
44-volume Histoire Naturelle, which 
compiled his understandings of the 
natural world. In this work, Buffon noted 
the similarities between humans and 
apes, and speculated that they might 
have a common ancestor. In other 
writings, Buffon suggested that Earth 
was much older than 6000 years, as was 
commonly believed. 
 Buffon’s ideas were revolutionary 
for his time. By 1830, however, other 
scholars from many areas of inquiry—
paleontology, geology, geography, and 
biology—began to share their ideas to 
explain how life could change with the 
passage of time.
Cuvier’s Fossils
French naturalist Georges Cuvier (1769–
1832) is largely credited with developing 
the science of paleontology, the study of 
ancient life through the examination of 
fossils. Cuvier found that each stratum 
(layer of rock) is characterized by a 
unique group of fossil species. He also 
found that the deeper (older) the 
stratum, the more dissimilar the species 
are from modern life (see Figure 4.7). As 
Cuvier worked from stratum to stratum, 
he found evidence that new species 
appeared and others disappeared over the 
passage of time. This evidence showed 
that species could become extinct.
 To explain his observations, Cuvier 
proposed the idea that Earth experienced 
many destructive natural events, such as 
fl  oods and volcanic eruptions, in the past. 
Section Outcomes
In this section, you will
• 
compare different 
explanations for changes 
in populations over time 
• 
describe evidence to 
support the theory of 
evolution
• 
explain how scientifi c 
knowledge is accumulated 
and organized to develop 
theories
• 
analyze data to determine 
relatedness among 
organisms
Key Terms
theory of evolution by 
natural selection
paleontology
inheritance of acquired 
characteristics
fossil record
transitional fossils
biogeography
homologous structures
analogous structures
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   92 3296_Chapter_04.indd   911/4/06   5:36:38 PM11/4/06   5:36:38 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   123
These events, which he called revolutions, 
were violent enough to have killed 
numerous species each time they occurred.
2

  A geologist fi  nds the fossil of a 
species of fi  sh in one stratum but 
not in the next highest stratum. 
Infer how Cuvier might have 
explained this observation.
• • •
• • •
Lyell’s Principles of Geology
Other scientists had ideas that differed 
from Cuvier’s theory. Scottish geologist 
Charles Lyell (1797–1875) rejected the 
idea of revolutions. He proposed, instead, 
that geological processes operated at the 
same rates in the past as they do today. 
He reasoned that, if geological changes 
are slow and continuous rather than 
catastrophic, then Earth might be more 
than 6000 years old. As well, Lyell 
theorized that slow, subtle processes 
could happen over a long period of time 
and could result in substantial changes. 
The forces that build and erode 
mountains, for example, and the rate at 
which this change happens is no different 
today than it was in the past. Floods in 
the past had no greater power than 
fl  oods that occur today. This idea 
inspired naturalist Charles Darwin and 
others. If Earth is slowly changing, they 
wondered, could slow, subtle changes 
also occur in populations?
2

  How did Lyell’s observations 
about changes in geology inspire 
naturalists’ thoughts about 
changes in life on Earth?
• • •
• • •
Lamarck: The Inheritance 
of Acquired Characteristics
In his book Philosophie Zoologique, 
French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck 
(1744–1829) outlined his ideas about 
changes in species over time. By 
comparing current species of animals 
with fossil forms, Lamarck observed 
what he interpreted as a “line of descent,” 
or progression, in which a series of fossils 
(from older to more recent) led to a 
modern species. He thought that species 
increased in complexity over time, until 
they achieved a level of perfection.
 Lamarck also thought that 
characteristics, such as large muscles, 
that were acquired during an organism’s 
lifetime could be passed on to its 
offspring. Following this reasoning, the 
large, powerful chest muscles of a horse 
would be passed on to its offspring, 
which would have the same 
characteristics. Lamarck called this the 
inheritance of acquired characteristics. 
 Lamarck provided a hypothesis for 
how the heredity of characteristics from 
one generation to the next might 
happen. More importantly, he noted 
that an organism’s adaptations to the 
OLDER 
STRATUM
WITH OLDER
FOSSILS
YOUNGER STRATUM
WITH MORE
RECENT FOSSILS
Figure 4.7  Deep rock 
strata (layers of rock) 
are older than strata that 
are closer to the surface. 
Different species of 
fossilized organisms can 
be found in different rock 
strata. This is evidence that 
not all life forms came into 
existence at the same time. 
(The arrangement of strata 
varies when mountains are 
formed. Often, the strata 
are tilted and the oldest 
layers are toward the 
inside of the mountain.)
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Writers of history use the 
term catastrophism to 
describe Cuvier’s ideas 
about the powerful forces 
that led to the extinction 
of species in Earth’s past. 
Cuvier did not use this term 
himself, although he did 
refer to these events as 
catastrophes.
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Early Chinese records 
describe the bones of 
“underground dragons.” 
These are fossils that 
scientists, much later, 
recognized as being parts 
of dinosaurs. The use of 
“dragon bones” in traditional 
medicine dates back at least 
3500 years.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   102 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1011/4/06   5:36:39 PM11/4/06   5:36:39 PM

124    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
8VeZ=dgc
IV]^i^
KVaeVgV^hd
;Va`aVcY
>haVcYh
BdciZk^YZd
G^dYZ
?VcZ^gd
<Va{eV\dh
>haVcYh
Hdji]
6bZg^XV
7V]^V
Cdgi]
6bZg^XV
6iaVci^X
DXZVc
8VeZKZgYZ
>haVcYh
!ZORES
:jgdeZ
8VcVgn
>haVcYh
8VeZd[
<ddY=deZ
7g^i^h]
>haZh
6[g^XV
8dXdh
>haVcYh
@^c\<Zdg\Z
HdjcY
6jhigVa^V
IVhbVc^V
CZl
OZVaVcY
environment resulted in characteristics 
that could be inherited by offspring. At 
the time, there was little understanding 
of cell biology and no understanding of 
genetics. The idea of inheriting acquired 
characteristics was generally accepted to 
explain observations that species are not 
static and could change. Even Charles 
Darwin, who is credited with developing 
a comprehensive theory to explain how 
change in populations can occur, accepted 
Lamarck’s idea of inheritance and 
acknowledged Lamarck in his writing. 
Lamarck’s ideas were controversial to 
many people, though, simply because they 
fi  rmly believed that species never changed. 
 By the end of the 1800s, as biologists 
learned about cells, genes, and heredity, 
Lamarck’s mechanism for inheritance 
was rejected. 
2

  A farmer spends much of her 
time outdoors and, as a result, has 
very tanned skin. What would 
the hypothesis of inheritance 
of acquired characteristics say 
about the skin of her children? 
Why?
• • •
• • •
Darwin’s Evidence
In 1831, 22-year-old Charles Darwin 
(1809–1882) left England on the HMS 
Beagle, a British survey ship. The primary 
purpose of the expedition was to map 
the coast of South America. As well, the 
journey provided Darwin with an 
opportunity to explore the natural 
history of various countries and 
geographical locations. Figure 4.8 
outlines the Beagle’s journey.
        At        fi  rst, Darwin did not always 
understand the signifi  cance of many of 
his observations. Years later, however, 
many of these observations (as well as 
ideas and observations resulting from 
new work by Darwin and others) became 
important to his theory of evolution 
by natural selection. Darwin’s main 
observations, and the questions he 
asked about these observations, are 
summarized in Table 4.1.
2

  Describe, using two examples, 
how Charles Darwin used 
observation of the world around 
him to develop his hypothesis 
about how species might change 
with the passage of time.
• • •
• • •
Figure 4.8  The five-year voyage of the HMS Beagle 
took the young Charles Darwin around much of the 
world. Most of his time, however, was spent exploring 
the coast and coastal islands of South America.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   112 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1111/4/06   5:36:41 PM11/4/06   5:36:41 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   125
Table 4.1  Darwin’s Observations and Questions Arising from Them
ObservationsQuestions
   1.  The  fl  ora and fauna of the different regions the Beagle visited were distinct 
from those Darwin had studied in England and Europe. For example, the 
rodents in South America were structurally similar to one another but were 
quite different from the rodents Darwin had observed on other continents.
If all organisms originated in their present 
forms during a single event, Darwin wondered, 
why was there a distinctive clustering of similar 
organisms in different regions of the world? 
Why were all types of organisms not randomly 
distributed?
   2.  Darwin observed fossils of extinct animals, such as the armadillo-like 
glyptodont, that looked very similar to living animals.
glyptodont, an ancient 4 m, 2 t animal 
from South America
modern armadillo from South 
America (1.5 m)
Why would living and fossilized organisms that 
looked similar be found within the same region?
   3.  The  fi  nches and other animals Darwin saw on the Galápagos Islands closely 
resembled animals he had observed on the west coast of South America.
The Galápagos Islands, shown 
in this satellite image, include 
more than 20 small volcanic 
islands located approximately 
1000 km off the coast of 
Ecuador.
Why did the Galápagos species so closely 
resemble organisms on the adjacent South 
American coastline?
   4.  Galápagos species (such as tortoises and fi  nches) looked identical at fi rst, but 
actually varied slightly between islands. Each type of Galápagos fi nch, for 
example, was adapted to eating a different type of food based on the size and 
shape of its beak. Ten fi  nch species that occur on one of the islands, Santa 
Cruz, are shown here.
Why was there such a diversity of species in such 
a small area? Could these species have been 
modifi  ed from an ancestral form that arrived on 
the Galápagos Islands shortly after the islands 
were formed?
   5.  Through his experience in breeding pigeons and studying breeds of dogs 
and varieties of fl  owers, Darwin knew that it was possible for traits to be 
passed on from parent to offspring, and that sexual reproduction resulted 
in many variations within a species.
Could a process similar to artifi cial selection 
also operate in nature?
Large ground finch 
(Geospiza magnirostris)
Vegetarian tree finch 
(Platyspiza crassirostris)
Large insectivorous tree finch 
(Camarhynchus psittacula)
Small insectivorous tree finch 
(Camarhynchus parvulus)
Woodpecker finch 
(Cactospiza pallida)
Warbler finch 
(Certhidea olivacea)
Cactus ground finch 
(Geospiza scandens)
Sharp-beaked ground 
finch (Geospiza difficilis)
Small ground finch 
(Geospiza fuliginosa)
Medium ground finch 
(Geospiza fortis)
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   122 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1211/4/06   5:36:43 PM11/4/06   5:36:43 PM

126    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
Darwin and Wallace and 
the Theory of Evolution 
by Natural Selection
Charles Darwin was not the only person 
to organize his and others’ observations 
and ideas into a comprehensive theory to 
explain how species changed over time. 
Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913), 
another British naturalist, reached 
conclusions that were similar to 
Darwin’s. The fi  ndings of both scientists 
were made public in a presentation by 
Charles Lyell in 1858.
 Darwin and Wallace accepted that 
populations changed as time passed, 
but they were unclear how populations 
changed. An essay by economist Thomas 
Malthus (1766–1834), called Essay on the 
Principles of Population, provided them 
with a key idea. Malthus had proposed 
that populations produced far more 
offspring than their environments 
(for example, their food supply) could 
support and were eventually reduced 
by starvation or disease.
 According to Darwin and Wallace, 
individuals with physical, behavioural, 
or other traits that helped them survive 
in their local environments were more 
likely to survive to pass on these traits to 
offspring. Darwin and Wallace reasoned 
that competition for limited resources 
among individuals of the same species 
would select for individuals with 
favourable traits—traits that increased 
their chances of surviving to reproduce. 
Thus, a growing proportion of the 
population would have these traits in 
later generations and, as time passed, the 
population as a whole would have them. 
Darwin called this process natural 
selection. He published his ideas in 1859 
in On the Origin of Species by Means of 
Natural Selection.
2

  How might competition for 
resources lead to natural 
selection?
• • •
• • •
 Darwin proposed two main ideas in 
On the Origin of Species: 
   1.  Present forms of life have arisen by 
descent and modifi  cation from an 
ancestral species. 
   2.  The mechanism for modifi cation is 
natural selection working for long 
periods of time.
 Darwin proposed that all life on 
Earth had descended from some 
unknown organism. As descendants of 
this organism spread out over different 
habitats during the millennia, they 
developed adaptations that helped them 
better survive in their local environments. 
Darwin’s theory of natural selection 
showed how populations of individual 
species became better adapted to their 
local environments over time.
 Compare Darwin’s hypothesis to 
explain evolution with Lamarck’s ideas 
about inheritance in the next Thought Lab.
Further Evidence of Evolution
In On the Origin of Species, Darwin 
assembled a group of facts that had 
previously seemed unrelated. Darwin 
certainly was not the only person to 
conclude that life had changed during 
long periods of time, but he was the 
fi  rst person to publish these ideas in a 
comprehensive manner. Darwin’s ideas 
were developed, for the most part, by 
his observations of the distribution 
of organisms throughout the world 
(Table 4.1 on the previous page). 
Before and after publication of On the 
Origin of Species, biologists, geologists, 
geographers, and paleontologists 
provided a wealth of information 
that supported and strengthened 
what scientists now call the theory 
of evolution by natural selection. 
The Fossil Record
Sedimentary rock with fossils provides 
a fossil record of the history of life by 
showing species that were alive in the 
past. (See Figure 4.9.) For instance, when 
people examined the Burgess Shale fossil 
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Darwin did not use the 
word  “evolution”  in the 
original edition of On the 
Origin of Species. (“Evolved” 
is used once; it is the fi nal 
word in the book.) Instead, 
Darwin wrote about 
“descent with modifi cation.” 
One reason he did not use 
“evolution”  is that he felt it 
implied progress—that 
each generation was 
improving in some way. 
Natural selection is different 
from progress. It results 
from an ability to survive 
local conditions and 
reproduce successfully, 
thereby giving the survivors 
the opportunity to pass on 
the trait that helped them 
survive and reproduce.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   132 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1311/4/06   5:36:49 PM11/4/06   5:36:49 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   127
Flying fish (Exocoetus volitans) are actually superb gliders, 
not flyers. To escape predators, the fish, which are about 
18 cm long, aim toward the surface of the water and beat 
their powerful tails back and forth. When they break the 
surface, they continue to beat their tails, which increases 
their forward speed up to about 55 km/h. By spreading 
their side-fins, they are able to glide up from and over 
the surface for distances as great as 200 m!
Darwin and Lamarck both developed ideas about the 
inheritance of characteristics. Although Darwin read 
Lamarck’s work and learned from his ideas, Darwin 
eventually proposed an alternative hypothesis that gave 
a different explanation for the mechanism that resulted in 
change. Read the following quotations from the writings 
of Lamarck and Darwin:
“The environment exercises a great infl  uence over the 
activities of animals, and as a result of this infl uence the 
increased and sustained use or disuse of any organ are 
causes of modifi  cation of the organization and shape of 
animals and give rise to the anomalies observed in the 
progress of the complexity of animal organization.”
—Jean-Baptiste Lamarck in Philosophie zoologique, 1809
“... natural selection, or the survival of the fi ttest, does 
not necessarily include progressive development—it 
only takes advantage of such variations as arise and are 
benefi  cial to each creature under its complex relations of 
life. And it may be asked what advantage, as far as we can 
see, would it be to an ... intestinal worm ... to be highly 
organised. If it were no advantage, these forms would 
be left, by natural selection, unimproved or but little 
improved, and might remain for indefi  nite ages in their 
present lowly condition.” 
—Charles Darwin in On the Origin of Species, 1859
Procedure
   1.  Rewrite each quotation in your own words. 
   2.  How does Lamarck’s idea of  “use or disuse” differ from 
Darwin’s idea, which was later called  “descent with 
modifi cation?” 
Analysis
   1.  Flying  fi  sh use large pectoral fi  ns to glide in air. Explain 
how (a) Lamarck and (b) Darwin might account for the 
origin of the large pectoral fi  ns and the ability to glide. 
   2.  Lamarck suggested that organisms arise spontaneously 
and then become increasingly more complex. With a 
partner, discuss why this idea is not supported by the 
theory of natural selection. (Hint: You might want to 
consider an organism such as a snake, which evolved 
from a population of animals that had legs.)
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
4.3
Comparing the Ideas 
of Lamarck and Darwin
Target Skills
Comparing Darwinian and Lamarckian 
explanations of evolutionary change
Evaluating and communicating the 
merits of alternative explanations for 
evolutionary change
Figure 4.9  (A) The animals 
unearthed in the Burgess Shale 
lived over 500 million years ago 
during the Cambrian Explosion, 
when a stunning “explosion” of 
Earth’s biodiversity occurred. 
Remarkably, even some soft 
parts of animals, such as gills 
and digestive systems, are 
preserved. (B) This 60 cm fossil 
of Anomalocaris canadensis was 
found in the Burgess Shale 
near Field, British Columbia.
A
B
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   142 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1411/4/06   5:36:50 PM11/4/06   5:36:50 PM

128    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
beds in British Columbia, they found 
fossils of animals that had lived in an 
ancient ocean during the Cambrian 
period, over 500 million years ago. Not 
only are micro-organisms and soft-
bodied animals preserved in the Burgess 
Shale, but also these fossil beds contain 
some of the earliest animals with hard 
parts to be seen in the fossil record. Some 
of the fossilized animals found in the 
Burgess Shale are ancestors of animals 
that are common today. Others have long 
been extinct and are unlike anything in 
our modern oceans. 
 The fossil record provides the 
following evidence:
•
  Fossils found in young layers of rock 
(from recent geological periods and 
usually closer to the surface) are much 
more similar to species alive today than 
fossils found in deeper, older layers 
of rock. 
•
  Fossils appear in chronological order in 
the rock layers. So, probable ancestors 
Figure 4.10  This 
geologic time scale 
shows when 
organisms first appear 
in the fossil record.
BiologyFile
 
Web Link
The Burgess Shale in British 
Columbia, the rich fossil beds 
near Drumheller, Alberta, 
and the Joggins Fossil Cliffs 
in Nova Scotia are just a few 
of many Canadian sites with 
a rich store of fossils. What 
have Canadian fossils 
contributed to our 
understanding of evolution?
@
www
www.albertabiology.ca
%RA
#ENOZOIC
-ESOZOIC
0ALEOZOIC
'EOLOGIC 4IME 3CALE
0ERIOD
1UATERNARY
4ERTIARY
#RETACEOUS
*URASSIC
4RIASSIC
0ERMIAN
#ARBONIFEROUS
$EVONIAN
3ILURIAN
/RDOVICIAN
#AMBRIAN
0RECAMBRIAN
-ILLION
YEARS AGO
-AJOR EVOLUTIONARY
EVENTS













(UMANS EVOLVE
&IRST PLACENTAL MAMMALS
&LOWERING PLANTS
DOMINANT
&IRST BIRDS
&IRST MAMMALS
&IRST FLOWERING PLANTS
&IRST DINOSAURS
#ONEBEARING PLANTS DOMINANT
&IRST REPTILES
'REAT COAL DEPOSITS FORM
&IRST SEED PLANTS
&IRST AMPHIBIANS
&IRST LAND PLANTS
&IRST JAWED FISH
!LGAE DOMINANT
&IRST VERTEBRATES
3IMPLE INVERTEBRATES
,IFE DIVERSIFIES
%UKARYOTES
0ROKARYOTES
,IFE EVOLVES
2EPRESENTATIVE
ORGANISMS
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   152 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1511/4/06   5:36:56 PM11/4/06   5:36:56 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   129
-ODERN TOOTHED WHALES
2ODHOCETUS KASRANIS SMALL HIND LIMBS WOULD 
NOT HAVE HELPED IT SWIM MUCH LESS WALK
!MBULOCETUS NATANS LIKELY WALKED 
ON LAND AS MODERN SEA LIONS DO	 AND 
SWAM BY FLEXING ITS BACKBONE AND PADDLING 
WITH ITS HIND LIMBS AS MODERN OTTERS DO	
0AKICETUS ATTOCKI LIVED ON LAND BUT ITS SKULL HAD 
ALREADY EVOLVED FEATURES CHARACTERISTIC OF WHALES
for a species would be found in older 
rocks, which would usually lie beneath 
the rock in which the later species was 
found.
•
  Not all organisms appear in the fossil 
record at the same time. For example, 
the fossil history of vertebrates shows 
that fi  sh are the oldest vertebrates. In 
subsequent layers, the fossils of other 
vertebrates—amphibians, reptiles, 
mammals, and birds—appear. This 
reinforces scientifi  c evidence that 
amphibians evolved from ancestral 
fi  sh, reptiles evolved from ancestral 
amphibians, and both mammals and 
birds evolved from different groups of 
reptiles (mammals fi  rst, and then birds). 
It is important to remember that these 
changes were slow and took millions 
of years. The geological time scale in 
Figure 4.10 shows when organisms 
fi  rst appear in the fossil record. 
2

  List two ways that the fossil 
record has helped scientists 
understand that organisms 
change over time.
• • •
• • •
Transitional Fossils
The original fossil record gave only 
scattered “snapshots” of ancestral forms, 
and critics of the theory were concerned 
about the “gaps.” The ongoing discovery 
of hundreds of transitional fossils—
fossils that show intermediary links 
between groups of organisms—has 
helped scientists better understand 
the process and relationships between 
groups of organisms. Transitional fossils 
link the past with the present. For 
example, scientists have found fossilized 
whales that lived 36 to 55 million years 
ago. These fossils link present-day whales 
to terrestrial ancestors. The Basilosaurus 
and Dorudon were ancient whales that 
had tiny hind limbs, but led an entirely 
aquatic life. Dorudon was about the size 
of a large dolphin, about 5 m long. It had 
a tiny pelvis (located near the end of its 
tail) and 10-cm legs, both of which 
would have been useless to an animal 
that lived an aquatic life. A more 
recently discovered transitional form, 
Ambulocetus, announced in 1994, had 
heavier leg bones. Scientists hypothesize 
that it lived both on land and in water. 
Figure 4.11 shows Ambulocetus, as well 
as two other ancestors of present-day 
whales, whose discovery has fi lled gaps 
in the fossil record of whales.
 In 1995, the fossil of a previously 
unknown dinosaur called Atrociraptor 
(“savage robber”) was discovered 
near Drumheller (see Figure 4.12). 
Atrociraptor was a small meat-eating 
dinosaur, about the size of a 10-year-old 
child. It is thought to be a close non-
birdlike relative of Archaeopteryx. Fossils 
Figure 4.11  Fossil evidence suggests that modern, aquatic, toothed whales evolved from a 
terrestrial ancestor, Pakicetus attocki. Basilosaurus and Dorudon, not shown in this illustration, 
appear more recently in the fossil record, after the appearance of Rodhocetus.
Figure 4.12  Based on 
where Atrociraptor was 
found in the fossil record, 
it was alive about 70 million 
years ago, during the 
Cretaceous period.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   162 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1611/4/06   5:36:58 PM11/4/06   5:36:58 PM

130    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
of Archaeopteryx show a transitional 
stage in the fossil record because this 
species had characteristics of both 
reptiles (dinosaurs) and birds. 
Archaeopteryx had feathers, but, unlike 
any modern bird, it also had teeth, claws 
on its wings, and a bony tail.
 In early 2005, a Canadian team of 
paleontologists made another amazing 
discovery at a fossil site in China. They 
found a pair of shelled eggs inside a 
fossilized dinosaur. The dinosaur, a 
kind of theropod, is considered to be 
an ancestor of modern birds. The shape 
of the eggs, the evidence at the fossil 
site, past fossil discoveries, and the 
paleontologists’ understanding of the 
biology of birds and reptiles suggested 
to them that this dinosaur laid its eggs in 
intervals like modern-day birds, rather 
than all at once like reptiles do. 
Patterns of Distribution 
As you know from Chapter 3, organisms 
are not distributed evenly over Earth. 
Biogeography is the study of the past 
and present geographical distribution 
of organisms. Many of the observations 
that Darwin and Wallace used to develop 
their theories were based on biogeography. 
Darwin and Wallace hypothesized that 
species evolve in one location and then 
spread out to other regions. 
 Biogeography supports this 
hypothesis with examples such as the 
following:
•
  Geographically  close  environments  
(for example, desert and forest habitats 
in South America) are more likely to 
be populated by related species than 
are locations that are geographically 
separate but environmentally similar 
(for example, a desert in Africa and a 
desert in Australia). So, for instance, 
cacti are native only to the deserts of 
North, Central, and South America. 
They are not naturally found in other 
deserts in the world, such as those in 
Australia or Africa.
•
  Animals found on islands often closely 
resemble animals found on the closest 
continent. This suggests that animals 
on islands have evolved from mainland 
migrants, with populations becoming 
adapted over time as they adjust to the 
environmental conditions of their new 
home. For example, the lizards found on 
the Canary Islands, off the northwest 
coast of Africa, are very similar to the 
lizards found in west Africa. 
•
  Fossils of the same species can be found 
on the coastline of neighbouring 
continents. For example, fossils of the 
reptile Cynognathus have been found 
in Africa and South America. How 
can this be explained? The location of 
continents are not fi  xed; continents are 
slowly moving away from one another. 
At one time, the continents of Africa 
and South America were joined in one 
“supercontinent.”
•
  Closely related species are almost never 
found in exactly the same location or 
habitat.
Anatomy
Vertebrate forelimbs can be used for 
various functions, including fl ying (birds 
and bats), running (horses and dogs), 
swimming (whales and seals), and 
swinging from tree branches (monkeys). 
Despite their different functions, 
however, all vertebrate forelimbs contain 
the same set of bones, organized in 
similar ways. How is this possible? The 
most plausible explanation is that the 
basic vertebrate forelimb originated 
with a common ancestor. Homologous 
structures are those that have similar 
structural elements and origin but may 
have a different function. The limbs 
shown in Figure 4.13 have similar 
structures, such as number of bones, 
muscles, ligaments, tendons, and blood 
vessels. These structural elements are 
arranged, however, to be best suited for 
different functions: walking, fl ying, or 
swimming. Homologous structures are 
similar because they were inherited from 
a common ancestor. As you can see in 
Figure 4.13, homologous structures 
differ in their anatomy based on an 
BiologyFile
 
Web Link
The theory of plate tectonics, 
developed by geologists 
and paleontologists, 
explains how the locations 
of continents have changed 
over Earth’s history. What 
pivotal role did Canadian 
geologist John Tuzo Wilson 
play in formulating this 
theory? How does this 
theory support the theory 
of evolution by natural 
selection?
@
www
www.albertabiology.ca
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Aboriginal people have 
lived off the land in the 
Wood Buffalo region in 
Northern Alberta for more 
than 8000 years. The Wood 
Buffalo National Park was 
created with the help of 
local Aboriginal groups to 
preserve the cultural history 
of the area and to protect 
the world’s largest free-
roaming bison (Genus Bison) 
herd and the last natural 
nesting site for the 
endangered whooping 
crane (Grus americana).
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   172 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1711/4/06   5:37:00 PM11/4/06   5:37:00 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   131
organism’s lifestyle and environment. 
For example, the bones in a horse’s leg 
are larger and heavier than the bones in 
a bat’s wing.
 Homologous structures can be 
similar in structure or function or both. 
The limbs in Figure 4.13 are structurally 
similar. As well, the lower limbs of the 
human, frog, and horse perform the 
same function: movement on land. 
Functional similarity in anatomy, 
however, does not necessarily mean that 
species are closely related. The wings 
of insects, birds, bats, and pterosaurs 
(extinct fl  ying reptiles) are similar in 
function, but not in structure. (For 
example, bones support bird wings, 
whereas a tough material called chitin 
makes up insect wings.) All of these 
organisms evolved independently of one 
another and did not share a common 
ancestor with wings. 
HUMANFROGBATPORPOISEHORSE
Figure 4.13  These 
vertebrates have the same 
basic arrangement of 
bones (as indicated by 
the colours), but the 
bones have different uses.
CUTICLE
8gdhhHZXi^dcd[V=V^g
CORTEXMEDULLACUTICULAR SCALE
PIGMENT GRANULES
Mammals are the only animals that have hair. Among 
mammalian species, hair can vary in length, density, texture, 
and colour. The basic structure of hair, however, is the same 
for all mammals. Each hair has a central medulla that is 
surrounded by a dense cortex, which contains most of the 
pigment granules that give each hair its colour. The cortex is 
covered by a layer called the cuticle. The scales of the cuticle 
are specifi  c to a particular genera or even species of 
mammals. Thus, mammalian hair has a common origin, 
yet may serve different functions. In this activity, you will 
investigate variations in the functions of mammalian hair.
Procedure
   1.  Work in small groups of three or four. 
   2.  Each person in your group should choose a different 
type of mammalian hair from the following list:
a)  the stout, strong hairs of a porcupine
b)  the dense underfur, or underhairs, of a sea otter
  c)  the vibrissae (“whiskers”) of a cat
  d)  the thick mane of a lion 
  e)  the long, thick hair of a woolly mammoth
  f)  the horn of a rhinoceros, which is made of densely 
packed hair
  g)  the “scales” of a pangolin, which are modifi ed hairs
  h)  the  soft,  fl  uffy qiviut (fur) of a muskox 
   3.  Conduct research to investigate the structure of the hair 
you have chosen. Research how the animal’s lifestyle and 
habitat might explain the particular function(s) of its hair.
Analysis
   1.  Based on the information you collected and your 
understanding of natural selection,
  a)  hypothesize how the structure of the hair is related 
to abiotic conditions in an animal’s environment
  b)  write a hypothesis stating how the variations might 
have arisen from the basic hair structure of a common 
mammalian ancestor
   2.  Present your fi  ndings to the others in your group in 
a written or oral report, a computer presentation, or 
another form that is easily shared. 
ICT
ICT
   3.  Write a statement that describes one similarity and one 
difference in the adaptations of the hair studied by the 
members of your group. 
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
4.4
Homologies of Hair
Target Skills
Hypothesizing the adaptive signifi  cance 
of variations in the structure of hair
Using electronic research techniques to 
analyze and synthesize ideas related 
to hair as a homologous structure, in 
order to determine patterns and links
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   182 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1811/4/06   5:37:01 PM11/4/06   5:37:01 PM

132    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
 Body parts that perform similar 
functions, even though the organisms do 
not have a common evolutionary origin, 
are called analogous structures. 
2

  Are bird wings and bat wings 
homologous structures or 
analogous structures? Explain 
your answer.
• • •
• • •
Embryology
The embryos of different organisms 
exhibit similar stages of embryonic 
development. For example, all vertebrate 
embryos have paired pouches, or out-
pocketings of the throat. In fi sh and 
some amphibians, the pouches develop 
into gills. In humans, the pouches 
become parts of the ears and throat. 
At certain stages in the development 
of the embryo, the similarities among 
vertebrates are more apparent than the 
differences, as you can see in Figure 4.14. 
 The similarities among embryos 
in related groups (such as vertebrates) 
point to a common ancestral origin. It 
follows that related species would share 
both adult features (such as basic arm-
bone arrangements, as discussed earlier) 
and embryonic features (such as the 
presence of paired pouches in the throat).
FISH
CHICKEN
PIG
HUMAN
2

  How does an understanding of 
embryology support the idea 
that similar organisms, such as 
vertebrates, have a common 
ancestor?
• • •
• • •
Molecular Biology
The evolutionary relationships among 
species are refl  ected in their DNA and 
proteins. The fi  eld of molecular biology 
developed as technologies to identify 
molecules, such as DNA and protein 
molecules, developed. This fi eld has 
provided evidence that helps to support 
the idea of common ancestry and 
evolution through natural selection. From 
molecular biology, we have learned the 
following information about life on Earth: 
•
  All cells consist of membranes fi lled 
with—among other components—
water, genetic material, proteins, lipids, 
and carbohydrates.
•
  Proteins called enzymes control 
biochemical reactions in all organisms. 
•
  In all organisms, proteins are 
synthesized from amino acids.
•
  In all organisms, all cells that can 
replicate contain DNA. Since DNA 
carries genetic information, scientists 
can determine how closely related two 
organisms are by comparing their 
DNA. If two species have similar 
patterns in portions of their DNA, this 
similarity indicates that these portions 
of their DNA were most likely inherited 
from a recent common ancestor.
Genetics 
The use of modern technology has led to 
many discoveries that support Darwin’s 
theory. Scientists now know how species 
passed on their traits to their offspring, 
and how the blueprints (genes) for these 
traits could change by mutation, as 
you learned in section 4.1. Current 
evolutionary theory connects genetics 
with the theory of natural selection, 
and how natural selection operates on 
populations. Thus, genetic evidence 
Figure 4.14  Similarities 
in the embryos of fish, 
reptiles, birds, and 
mammals provide 
evidence of evolution.
BiologyFile
 
Tr y This
Some structures evolved for 
one function and became 
useful for another function 
as time passed. For example, 
feathers might have evolved 
originally as an adaptation 
for insulation and later 
might have become useful 
for fl ight. Adaptations that 
were originally selected 
for one function but later 
became useful for another 
function are called 
exaptations. Originally, 
exaptations were called pre-
adaptions. How could the 
term “pre-adaptation”  lead 
to some misconceptions 
about natural selection?
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   192 3296_Chapter_04.indd   1911/4/06   5:37:18 PM11/4/06   5:37:18 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   133
and the understanding of heredity and 
mutations lend support to hypotheses 
that stem from observations of fossils, 
anatomy, biogeography, embryology, 
and molecular biology. 
2

 List fi  ve different fi  elds of science 
that have contributed to the 
theory of evolution by natural 
selection. How has each fi eld 
contributed to refi  ning this theory?
• • •
• • •
Section 4.2 Summary
•
  Scientifi  c theories explain facts and tie 
them together in a comprehensive way, 
enabling scientists to make predictions 
about new situations and experimental 
outcomes.
•
  The theory of evolution ties together 
facts to provide a logical framework 
that explains how life on Earth has 
changed and is still changing.
•
  Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel 
Wallace both developed hypotheses 
to explain natural selection.
•
  Contributions by Cuvier, Lamarck, 
Malthus, Lyell, and others helped to 
develop the hypotheses that have 
become the theory of evolution by 
natural selection.
•
  The fossil record, biogeography, 
anatomy, molecular biology, and 
genetics all provide evidence for 
evolution.
•
  New discoveries of fossils, called 
transitional fossils, help fi  ll in the 
“gaps” in the fossil record.
•
  Homologous structures are those 
that have similar structural elements 
and origin but may have a different 
function. Analogous structures 
perform similar functions, even though 
the organisms do not have a common 
evolutionary origin.
   1.  Describe the contributions of the following people 
to the understanding of evolution:
a)  Cuvier
b)  Malthus
c)  Wa l l a c e
d)  Lyell
   2.  Although Lamarck and Darwin proposed different 
explanations for how characteristics are passed from 
parent to offspring, their theories had some similarities. 
Identify and compare these similarities. 
   3.  Is a bat more closely related to a bird or to a mouse? 
Explain your answer using the terms “analogous 
structure” and “homologous structure.” 
   4.  Much of the theory of evolution has been developed by 
interpreting certain observations or by making logical 
inferences about these observations. Outline the 
inferences that Darwin and other scientists made 
from each of the following observations.
a)  Some species found on islands are very similar 
to species found on neighbouring continents. 
b)  No two individuals are exactly alike.
c)  Resources, such as food, are limited. 
   5.  List three facts that support the idea of organisms 
sharing a common ancestor. 
   6.  An athlete breaks her leg. Years later, she has a child who 
walks with a limp. Is this an example of a trait being 
passed from one generation to the next? Justify your 
answer. 
   7.  At the site of a fossil bed, you come across fossils in a 
number of layers in the sediment. Which layers would 
have the oldest fossils, and which would have the 
youngest fossils? Explain your reasoning. 
   8.  Defi  ne the term transitional fossils and explain how 
these help scientists to better understand relationships 
between groups of organisms.
   9.  Use word processing or spreadsheet software to create a 
table summarizing the differences between homologous 
and analagous structures. Use the following headings: 
structure, function, and origin. 
ICT
ICT
 10.  Explain how scientists can use DNA to determine the 
evolutionary relationship between two organisms.
Review
Section  4.2
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   202 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2011/4/06   5:37:20 PM11/4/06   5:37:20 PM

 
Connections
Social  and  Environmental  Contexts
Social  and  Environmental  Contexts
134    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
How often have you read about a scientifi c “breakthrough” 
only to see it disputed (or completely contradicted) a few 
months later? What’s good for you one year seems to be 
bad for you the next. What is going on?
 Science is a process of constructing, refi ning, and 
revising knowledge and understanding. Individuals or 
small groups of scientists start the process. However, 
the result of their work—a new discovery, a rejected 
hypothesis, or a modifi  ed theory—is a collaborative 
process that requires feedback, discussion, and the 
eventual consensus of others in the scientifi c community.  
The Role of Scientific Review
Science requires, and is founded on, the practice of peer 
review. In 1560, an Italian scholar, Giambattista della 
Porta, founded the fi  rst organization for the exchange of 
scientifi  c ideas, known as The Academy of the Mysteries 
of Nature. Its purpose was to present scientifi c ideas 
for review and discussion. Since that time, countless 
societies, associations, journals, symposia, conferences, 
and now Internet resources have been set up to give 
scientists a place to communicate their ideas and fi ndings 
for the evaluation of their peers.
 This scrutiny is an essential part of the scientifi c 
process. Peer reviewers compare assumptions with their 
own knowledge, attempt to replicate or verify fi ndings, 
and frequently challenge their colleagues’ conclusions. 
This is why it is so important to document all procedures 
and carefully record the resulting data. 
 The review process has uncovered faulty 
experimental designs, incorrect conclusions, and—at 
times—deliberately fraudulent data. In many cases, 
however, the process of peer review and scientifi c debate 
has led to the development, refi  nement, and acceptance 
of scientifi  c laws and theories that help shape our 
understanding of the world around us.
 The process is not foolproof. The sheer volume of 
material being published today in a variety of increasingly 
specialized journals makes it very diffi  cult for the fi eld to 
police itself effectively. Individual publications must have 
strict guidelines for submissions to ensure that legitimate 
research is being presented for review.
 In Darwin’s day, 1858, he publicly reported on the 
studies he and Alfred Russel Wallace had done related to 
the origin and diversity of life to the Linnean Society in 
London. On the Origin of Species was published the next 
year as a book, and scientifi  c colleagues used it to review 
the evidence presented and the conclusions. That review 
continues as more evidence is found, and more 
conclusions are reached, published, and debated.
Science and Society
Scientifi  c debates are not always confi  ned to the topics 
of scientifi  c evidence and conclusions. Scientists do 
not exist in a vacuum; they are part of society. Their 
discoveries have led to inventions that have transformed 
the ways in which we live our lives. Some scientifi c 
discoveries go beyond practical applications to challenge 
assumptions that sustain social institutions.
 For example, since the days of Aristotle, people in 
western society had believed that Earth was the centre 
of the universe. Theologians and political authorities 
had based their justifi  cation of social order on this 
understanding. In 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus, a Polish 
astronomer, challenged this Earth-centred view by 
publishing a new theory about Earth orbiting the Sun. 
In the 1600s, the astronomer and physicist Galileo Galilei 
(1564–1642) was imprisoned and threatened with torture 
for supporting Copernicus’s theory. Representatives of 
the state felt that a Sun-centred universe was a dangerous 
idea that would undermine social structures and authority.
 When Darwin published his book in 1859, those 
debating his theories and conclusions were not just 
scientists. Many non-scientists were alarmed by the 
implications of Darwin’s conclusions, which were 
thought to challenge the idea that humans were created 
intentionally by God for a special purpose and that, 
again, this would undermine the social order.
Debating Science
“When I consider healthy discussions that take place in the scientifi  c world, vigorous 
debate (or at least consideration) of opposing alternatives is critical for the successful 
development of ideas and identifi  cation of promising new areas of research. The ideas 
that withstand critical challenges from colleagues end up being the most robust and 
strongest theories.”
—Brent Edwards, PhD,
Starkey Hearing Research Centre
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   212 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2111/4/06   5:37:21 PM11/4/06   5:37:21 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   135
 The social debate over evolution was still raging in 
1925 when the state of Tennessee passed legislation that 
made it “unlawful” for any teacher there to “teach any 
theory that denies the story of the Divine Creation of 
man as taught in the Bible, and to teach instead that man 
has descended from a lower order of animals.” A high 
school biology teacher named John Thomas Scopes was 
soon charged with the offense. His trial, which became 
known through the media as “The Scopes Monkey Trial,” 
was held in a packed courthouse and followed by national 
newspapers in the U.S. (It also was the fi  rst trial to be 
broadcast on national radio.) 
 The arguments for and against the indictment largely 
revolved around preserving the separation of church and 
state, the validity of various interpretations of the Bible, 
and whether a conviction created a special status for one 
faith. The actual science related to the theory of evolution 
was not the focus of the debate; the concern was about its 
social impact. 
 Some of the current debates among scientists—for 
example, about climate change and the importance of 
preserving biodiversity—have also moved beyond the 
sphere of science and entered the public forum. Once 
again, scientifi  c conclusions are under fi  re, not because 
the science is thought to be wrong, but because there are 
concerns that the implications will somehow undermine 
social (and economic) principles and practices. 
• • •
   1.  You and your colleagues at the university have 
discovered a protein that you believe is a major 
trigger for certain types of heart disease. You’ve rerun 
your tests many times and gotten consistent results. 
Now it’s time to publish them. Choose two potential 
journals in which you could publish the research.
  a)  Describe the readership, including the total 
number and their general areas of expertise.
  b)  Describe the process for submitting research 
for review.
  c)  Explain how the publication is funded.
  d)  Assess and describe any potential impact the 
factors you’ve researched might have on the 
quality of attention and review your team’s 
work on proteins and heart disease will receive.
   2.  When and why do you think members of the general 
public should get involved in discussions about 
scientifi c fi  ndings? Describe the best forum for 
holding such discussions (for example, schools, 
courts, newspapers, radio, television, public 
meetings, or the Internet) and why you think 
it is the most effective.
   3.  The peppered moth, Biston betularia, has been the 
subject of scientifi  c study since 1848, when it was 
noted that the numbers of individuals of fl ecked and 
dark moth populations fl uctuated over relatively 
short periods of time that corresponded to the 
amount of air pollution in the moth’s habitat. 
Numerous studies confi  rm the hypothesis that 
natural selection is driving these population changes. 
However, this hypothesis has been challenged, mainly 
in the popular media, rather than in scientifi c 
journals. Do research to fi  nd and summarize the 
evidence that has been cited to challenge the hypothesis. 
   4. The Journal of Negative Results in Biomedicine is 
one of a handful of scientifi  c journals devoted to 
communicating the negative results of failed 
investigations and disproved hypotheses. Some 
scientists suggest that all scientifi c journals should 
do a better job of providing such information. Do 
you agree? Justify your reasoning.
Some observers of the Scopes Monkey Trial suggested that if 
they had a chance to debate the issue, monkeys might have 
strong objections.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   222 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2211/4/06   5:37:22 PM11/4/06   5:37:22 PM

136    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
4.3
SECTION
How Species Form
The two leopard frogs in Figure 4.15 look 
remarkably similar, but they are different 
species. How is a species defi ned? 
Historically, biologists defi ned species 
in terms of their physical form. Physical 
similarity, however, does not necessarily 
mean that organisms are the same species. 
Biologists now consider physiology, 
biochemistry, behaviour, and genetics, 
as well, when distinguishing one species 
from another.
What Is a Species? 
As you read in Section 4.1, a biological 
species consists of populations that can 
interbreed and produce a group of viable 
offspring, which can also reproduce 
in nature. Biological species that are 
geographically isolated cannot interbreed. 
What about biological species that share 
the same habitat?
 Biological species can also be 
described as being reproductively isolated 
from other species. Obviously, highly 
dissimilar species, such as elephants 
and frogs, cannot mate, so they are 
reproductively isolated. Populations 
that breed at different time periods, such 
as those that breed in the spring and 
those that breed in the fall, are also 
reproductively isolated. What about 
species that are similar, such as two 
species of warbler? In this section, you 
will learn how populations remain 
reproductively isolated from one another 
and how this can lead to the formation 
of new species.
Forming a New Species
There are two general pathways that can 
lead to the formation of new species, or 
speciation. As shown in Figure 4.16A, a 
new species may result from accumulated 
changes in the population over a long 
period of time. A new species gradually 
develops as a result of mutation and 
adaptation to changing environmental 
conditions, and the old species is 
gradually replaced. This is known as 
transformation. The evolution of 
mammoths followed this pathway. The 
ancestral mammoth lived approximately 
2.6 million to 700 000 years ago. It slowly 
evolved into the steppe mammoth that 
lived 700 000 to 500 000 years ago, and 
fi  nally into the woolly mammoth that 
lived 350 000 to 10 000 years ago.
 If this pathway were the only 
mechanism for the creation of new 
species, however, the total number and 
diversity of species in existence would 
remain virtually unchanged. In the 
second pathway to speciation, shown in 
Figure 4.16B, one or more species arise 
Section Outcomes
In this section, you will
• 
explain ways in which 
species can become 
reproductively isolated
• 
describe how new species 
form
• 
compare two models 
that explain the rate of 
evolution
Key Terms
speciation
geographical barriers
biological barriers
adaptive radiation
gradualism
punctuated equilibrium
Figure 4.15  The Northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens) (A) and Southern leopard frog (Rana 
sphenocephala) (B) were once thought to be part of a single, extremely variable species. Today, 
scientists agree that what they thought was one species of leopard frog is at least seven 
different, but related, species in North America.
AB
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   232 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2311/4/06   5:37:24 PM11/4/06   5:37:24 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   137
Figure 4.16  There are two pathways to 
speciation: (A) one species evolves into 
another species and (B) one or more species 
arise from a parent species.
from a parent species that continues to 
exist. This is known as divergence. For 
example, the small hoofed Hyracotherium, 
which lived approximately 50 million 
years ago, is thought to have been the 
common ancestor of modern horses, 
tapirs, and rhinoceroses.
 Both pathways to speciation are the 
result of natural selection. The second 
pathway increases biological diversity 
because it increases the number of species. 
2

 Defi  ne speciation and the two 
general pathways to speciation.
• • •
• • •
Keeping Populations Separate
For speciation to occur, two populations 
must be prevented from interbreeding. 
This means that the populations must 
become isolated from one another 
through geographical or biological 
barriers. If the populations remain 
isolated long enough, speciation will 
eventually occur because of changes 
accumulated in the population due 
to natural selection, which affects 
reproduction. When this happens, 
individuals in one population are no 
longer able to reproduce successfully 
with individuals in the other population. 
Geographical Barriers 
Geographical barriers, such as 
mountains and rivers, prevent 
interbreeding and result in speciation 
because they keep populations physically 
separated. For example, a substantial lava 
fl  ow may isolate populations, changes in 
ocean levels may turn a peninsula into 
an island, or a few colonizers may reach a 
geographically separate habitat (such as a 
newly formed island). After a long period 
of time, speciation will occur. The 
separated populations will no longer be 
able to mate and reproduce successfully 
with others members of the original 
population. 
 The geographic isolation of 
a population does not have to be 
maintained forever for speciation to 
occur. It must be maintained long 
enough, however, for the population to 
become reproductively incompatible 
with the original population.
 Members of the ancestral species 
of Galápagos fi  nches reached one of the 
islands in the archipelago, possibly as 
a result of being blown off course in a 
tropical storm. Unable to return to the 
mainland, the ancestral species evolved 
differently from their mainland relative. 
The ancestral birds, and their successive 
generations, have since spread through 
the islands. New species developed as 
they evolved in response to the unique 
environments on individual islands.
 Figure 4.17 on page 138 shows the 
hypothesized descent of multiple species 
from one common ancestor. The length 
of each vertical line refl  ects how much 
the DNA of each species has mutated 
from the group’s common ancestor. 
Biological Barriers 
Even if the ranges of species overlap, 
there are many biological barriers that 
can keep the species reproductively 
isolated. For example, behaviour is 
a biological barrier that will keep 
A
  Tr ans fo r mati o n
B
 Divergence
BiologyFile
 
Tr y This 
Most woolly mammoths 
became extinct about 
11 000 years ago. (A smaller 
form, called the dwarf 
woolly mammoth, survived 
until as recently as 3500 to 
5000 years ago on an island 
off the coast of northern 
Russia.) Fossil records show 
that human hunting had a 
role to play in the extinction 
of the woolly mammoth, as 
did global warming. Many 
scientists are concerned 
about how global warming 
might affect populations 
today. (For example, 
changes in climate or water 
levels can affect food 
supplies or result in a loss 
of habitat.) With a partner, 
discuss ways in which global 
warming might affect the 
evolution of species by 
natural selection.
BiologyFile
 
FYI
Charles Darwin used the 
variations he could see and 
measure in the Galápagos 
fi nches to hypothesize how 
speciation might have 
happened in the Galápagos 
Islands. Today, DNA evidence 
supports Darwin’s original 
hypothesis and adds further 
information to help 
scientists understand how 
the different lineages of 
fi nches could have arisen 
from an ancestral 
population. 
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   242 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2411/4/06   5:37:33 PM11/4/06   5:37:33 PM

138    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
individuals separate. The courtship 
songs of birds are one type of 
behavioural barrier. Male birds use 
distinct calls that are recognized by other 
birds of the same species during their 
mating season. Birds that have diverged 
from a common ancestral species may 
have similar calls, but their calls are 
different enough from the calls of 
neighbouring species to provide a 
biological barrier to reproduction.
 Species of spiders also use biological 
barriers. Female spiders use pheromones 
(chemical signals) to attract mates of the 
same species. Some male spiders, such 
as the one in Figure 4.18, use specifi c 
movements to identify themselves to 
the females. 
 Other species may live in the same 
general area but use different habitats, 
and therefore encounter each other 
rarely, if at all. An example is two species 
of garter snakes. One species usually lives 
near water, and the other species lives in 
open areas, rarely near water. This is 
different from a geographical barrier 
because there is no physical impediment 
keeping the populations apart. 
 Take a look at the behavioural 
barriers to reproduction in leopard 
frogs in the following Thought Lab.
COMMON ANCESTOR
VEGETARIAN TREE FINCH
# CRASSIROSTRIS	
LARGE INSECTIVOROUS
TREE FINCH
# PSITTACULA	
SMALL INSECTIVOROUS
TREE FINCH
# PARVULUS	
WOODPECKER FINCH
# PALLIDUS	
WARBLER FINCH
# OLIVACEA	
CACTUS GROUND FINCH
' CONIROSTRIS	
SHARPBEAKED GROUND
FINCH ' DIFFICILIS	
SMALL GROUND FINCH
' FULIGINOSA	
MEDIUM GROUND
FINCH ' FORTIS	
LARGE GROUND FINCH
' MAGNIROSTRIS	
WARBLER FINCHES
'ENUS #ERTHIDEA
TREE FINCHES
'ENUS #AMARHYNCHUS
GROUND FINCHES
'ENUS 'EOSPIZA
BiologyFile
 
Web Link
Scientists at the University 
of British Columbia have 
been tracking the speciation 
of greenish warblers 
(Phylloscopus trochiloides) 
in various habitats in Asia. 
The songs of different 
populations of this bird 
differ slightly in each habitat 
throughout their range. 
What other differences 
have resulted from the 
birds’ isolation?
@
www
www.albertabiology.ca
Figure 4.17  Hypothesized evolutionary relationships for finches 
from the Galápagos Islands. The ancestral population initially 
gave rise to four lineages of finches. As time passed, different 
lineages began to become geographically and reproductively 
isolated from each other. For example, the birds that are now 
called warbler finches developed beaks that were more slender 
than the beaks of their ancestor to specialize in eating insects.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   252 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2511/4/06   5:37:36 PM11/4/06   5:37:36 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   139
Figure 4.18  The small (15 to 20 mm), male 
golden orb spider (from the Genus Nephila) 
signals his identity and intentions to the 
female (20 to 30 mm, shown on the left) by 
plucking a strand of the web. His “love song” 
keeps his species reproductively isolated 
from other spider species because the 
female recognizes the signals of his particular 
mating behaviour. This prevents him from 
being mistaken for an interloper and being 
eaten by the female.
2

  How is a bird’s call a barrier to 
speciation?
• • •
• • •
Speciation Occurs in 
Reproductively Isolated 
Populations
When populations become reproductively 
isolated—even when they have not 
become geographically isolated—
speciation has occurred. For example, 
animals can become reproductively 
isolated within the geographical range 
of a parent population if they begin to 
use resources that are not used by their 
parents. Lake Victoria in Africa is the 
largest tropical lake in the world. The 
lake is home to hundreds of species of 
closely related fi shes, called cichlids (see 
Figure 4.19). Each species has features 
Procedure
How do frog calls result in keeping species separate? Listen 
to the calls of two different species of leopard frogs, supplied 
by your teacher.
Analysis
   1.  How is a frog call a barrier that keeps species distinct?
   2.  Leopard frogs in North America include the northern 
leopard frog (Rana pipiens), southern leopard frog (Rana 
sphenocephala), Rio Grande (Rana berlandieri), plains 
(Rana blairi), Florida (Rana sphenocephala 
sphenocephala), Ramsey Canyon (Rana subaquavocalis), 
and lowland (Rana yavapaiensis). Choose two of these 
species. Use print or electronic resources to help you 
describe, in point form, the differences that result in 
their being considered separate species. 
ICT
ICT
Thought Lab
Thought Lab
4.5
Leopard Frogs: One Species or Seven?
Target Skills
Using a range of tools to gather and 
record data and information about 
species of leopard frogs
Using appropriate modes of 
representation to communicate ideas
&ISH EATER
3NAIL EATER
!LGAE SCRAPER
:OOPLANKTON EATER
,EAF EATER
)NSECT EATER
Figure 4.19  At one time, 
more than 600 species of 
cichlids lived in Africa’s 
Lake Victoria. By analyzing 
a specific gene in the fish, 
scientists have estimated 
that the first cichlids 
entered Lake Victoria 
200 000 years ago.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   262 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2611/4/06   5:37:38 PM11/4/06   5:37:38 PM

140    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
that make it unique from other cichlid 
species in the lake, and none of these 
species is found anywhere else on Earth. 
Remarkably, these species all are 
descended from a single common 
ancestor—a species of cichlid that 
entered Lake Victoria from the Nile 
River. This incredible explosion of 
speciation within the same lake 
happened as small groups of the parent 
population began to exploit different 
food sources and habitats in the lake. The 
lake level has risen and fallen many times 
during its history, periodically isolating 
small groups of fi  sh, and these fi sh have 
changed extensively because of selective 
pressures. Scientists studying the cichlids 
hypothesize that many of the species in 
the lake today originated after the lake 
dried to just a few small pools of water 
about 14 000 years ago. Populations were 
isolated in these pools of water until the 
water level rose again. The speciation of 
cichlids has produced a remarkable 
variety of cichlids with a fascinating 
diversity of teeth, jaws, mating 
behaviours, and coloration.
2

  How could the rise and fall of 
lake levels over thousands of 
years result in the speciation 
of a population of fi sh?
• • •
• • •
Adaptive Radiation
The diversifi  cation of a common 
ancestral species into a variety of species, 
all of which are differently adapted, is 
called adaptive radiation. The speciation 
of fi  nches throughout the Galápagos 
Islands is an example of adaptive 
radiation. Another example is the fruit 
fl y genus Drosophila of the Hawaiian 
islands. Descendents of the ancestral 
Drosophila proliferated on the fi rst island 
they inhabited. Then, individuals began 
to disperse to other islands. The islands 
were ecologically different enough to 
have different environmental situations 
acting on individuals. The various 
selective pressures resulted in different 
feeding and mating habits, as well as 
morphological (physical) differences of 
the hundreds of types of fruit fl ies that 
now inhabit the islands. 
The Pace of Evolution
How fast is evolutionary change? There 
are currently two models that scientists 
have proposed for the pace of evolution: 
gradualism and punctuated equilibrium. 
Since Darwin’s time, many evolutionary 
biologists have supported the model of 
gradualism, which says that gradual 
change occurs steadily, in a linear 
fashion. According to this model, big 
changes (such as the evolution of a new 
species) occur as a result of many small 
changes. The fossil record, however, 
rarely reveals fossils that show this 
gradual transition. Instead, paleontologists 
most often fi  nd species that appear 
suddenly in the fossil record and then 
disappear from the record just as 
abruptly. (It should be remembered, 
however, that not all species have 
necessarily left fossils, and many 
fossils have not yet been discovered.) 
 The different rates of evolution and 
evidence in the fossil record that show 
periods of rapid change (for example, 
rapid speciation after mass extinctions) 
have led to another model to explain 
the rate of evolution: punctuated 
equilibrium. This model proposes that 
evolutionary history consists of long 
periods of equilibrium where there 
is little change, “punctuated” or 
interrupted by periods of speciation. 
According to the model of punctuated 
equilibrium, most species undergo most 
of their morphological changes when 
they fi  rst diverge from the parent 
species––for example, if a population 
colonizes a new area. After that, species 
change relatively little, even as they give 
rise to other species. Gradualism and 
punctuated equilibrium are modelled 
in Figure 4.20.
 Questions about the pace of 
evolution have stimulated much 
BiologyFile
 
FYI 
In the 1950s, the Nile perch 
was introduced to Lake 
Victoria as a source of 
food for the local human 
population. This species 
preyed heavily on cichlids 
and, by 1990, more than half 
of the known species of 
Lake Victoria cichlids had 
vanished. Now, however, 
the perch is being fi shed 
heavily and some cichlid 
populations appear to be 
recovering.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   272 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2711/4/06   5:37:43 PM11/4/06   5:37:43 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   141
discussion and research, as do all good 
scientifi  c hypotheses. Debate over the 
specifi  c details of the mechanisms of 
evolution by natural selection will 
continue; details may be adjusted as new 
technologies and scientifi c techniques 
are developed. Nevertheless, the theory 
of evolution by natural selection forms 
the backbone of biology as a science, and 
provides a framework to understand the 
world in which we live. The theory of 
evolution explains observations seen 
in fossils, anatomy, animal behaviours, 
molecular biology, biogeography, 
genetics, and geology. It is summarized 
in the box below.
4IME
Figure 4.20  Two models 
have been proposed to 
explain the pace of 
evolution: (A) gradualism 
and (B) punctuated 
equilibrium.
A
 Gradualism
B
 Punctuated equilibrium
The theory of evolution by natural selection includes the following ideas: 
 1.  Life forms have developed from 
ancestral species. 
 2.  All living things are related to one 
another by varying degrees through 
common descent. 
 3.  All living things on Earth have a 
common origin (share a common 
ancestor).
 4.  The mechanism by which one species 
evolves into another species involves 
random heritable genetic mutations. 
Some mutations result in a survival 
advantage for an individual; if so, the 
individual is more likely to survive and 
pass this mutation on to its offspring. 
Eventually, the successful mutation 
increases in the population and causes 
the population as a whole to start 
to change.
Section 4.3 Summary
•
  A species consists of a reproductively 
compatible population.
•
  A new species can form via one of 
two pathways: transformation or 
divergence. Both are the result of 
natural selection; only divergence 
increases biological diversity.
•
  Speciation (the formation of a 
new species) can occur when two 
populations are prevented from 
interbreeding. Barriers to reproduction 
can be geographical or biological. 
Speciation has occurred when 
populations become reproductively 
isolated (they cannot interbreed).
•
  Adaptive radiation is the diversifi cation 
of a common ancestral species into a 
variety of species, all of which are 
differently adapted.
•
  Scientifi  c debate about the pace of 
evolution continues. Two models are 
being proposed: gradualism, that is, 
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   282 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2811/4/06   5:37:44 PM11/4/06   5:37:44 PM

142    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
   1.  Explain how geographical isolation leads to speciation.
   2.  Use word processing or other software to create a fl ow 
chart illustrating the two pathways that can lead to the 
formation of a new species. Identify the pathway that 
leads to an increase in biodiversity. 
ICT
ICT
   3.  Explain the difference between habitat isolation and 
a geographical barrier to reproduction.
   4.  In the Hawaiian Islands, there are thousands of species 
of plants and animals that are found nowhere else on 
Earth. How would you explain this phenomenon?
   5.  Suppose that you are asked to catalogue the species of 
birds living in a remote area that has never before been 
visited by biologists. List the criteria you would use to 
determine whether the individual birds you observe 
or collect are the same species or different species.
   6.  Use word processing or spreadsheet software to create a 
table or chart that compares and contrasts the ideas of 
gradualism and punctuated equilibrium. 
ICT
ICT
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Red Island and Blue Island are hypothetical islands 500 km 
off the coast of South America. Red Island is volcanic in 
origin and is only fi  ve million years old. Blue Island 
separated from South America more than 80 million 
years ago. 
   7.  Predict the origins of the animals on both islands and 
explain how they may be similar to or different from the 
animals of South America.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Adaptive Radiation
A team of researchers led by Washington University 
biology professor Jonathan Losos has spent the last several 
years studying lizards of the genus Anolis (commonly 
called “anoles”) that live on large Caribbean islands. He 
has focussed on Puerto Rico, Cuba, Haiti, and Jamaica. 
All four islands are inhabited by a diverse array of anole 
lizards (there are 57 species on Cuba alone), and all four 
islands have quite similar habitats and vegetation.
Unlike rats and cockroaches, which are generalists and are 
much the same wherever you fi  nd them, anole lizards are 
specialists. In Puerto Rico, for example, one slender anole 
species with a long tail lives only in the grass. On narrow 
twigs at the base of trees you fi  nd a different species, also 
slender, but with stubby legs. On the higher branches of 
the tree a third species is found, of stocky build and long 
legs. High up in the leafy canopy of the tree lives a fourth 
giant green species.
The DNA data are clear-cut: specialist species on one 
island are not closely related to the same specialists 
elsewhere and are closely related to other anoles 
inhabiting the same island.
   8.  Explain how the situation described above would be an 
example of adaptive radiation.
Review
Section  4.3
gradual change occurred in a steady, 
linear way over time; and punctuated 
equilibrium, whereby evolutionary 
history is said to consist of long periods 
of equilibrium, interrupted by periods 
of speciation.
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   292 3296_Chapter_04.indd   2911/4/06   5:37:46 PM11/4/06   5:37:46 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   143
Chapter 4
Sexual reproduction, which combines the genetic 
information from two parents, results in variations in the 
characteristics of offspring. These variations may or may 
not give the organism a survival advantage. If it does, the 
variation is likely to be passed on to an increasing number 
of organisms in the population. 
 The main source of variations is mutations. Mutations 
occur when DNA is copied during cell division; mutations 
that occur in reproductive cells are the ones that can be 
passed on. When the characteristics of a population change 
because more individuals with certain inherited traits 
survived in the local environment and passed the traits on, 
it is called the process of natural selection. For this reason, 
the environment can be considered to be the driving force 
of population changes as time passes. If, however, an 
environmental change is so sudden or severe that no 
individuals of a population have characteristics that 
enable them to survive it, extinction is inevitable.
 The theory of evolution was developed from the ideas 
and observations of a number of scientists. Darwin and 
Wallace developed similar theories to explain evolution by 
natural selection, and Darwin published his version in On 
the Origin of Species in 1859. Since publication, discoveries 
in fi  elds such as paleontology, biogeography, anatomy, 
embryology, genetics, and molecular biology have produced 
supporting evidence for the theory. 
 Organisms that can interbreed and produce healthy 
offspring that can also reproduce are considered to be a 
biological species. New species form when populations 
become reproductively isolated, due to either geographical 
or biological barriers. Natural selection will occur differently 
within isolated populations, resulting in variations that 
could mean the isolated populations can no longer mate. 
Speciation may or may not result in increased biodiversity. 
3PECIES ARE REPRODUCTIVELY 
ISOLATED DUE TO
ģ
  GEOGRAPHICAL BARRIERS
ģ
  BIOLOGICAL BARRIERS
6ARIOUS LINES OF EVIDENCE FROM BIOLOGY AND 
GEOLOGY SHOW THAT
ģ
  POPULATIONS CHANGE OVER TIME
ģ
  DIFFERENT SPECIES ARE RELATED TO ONE ANOTHER
3ELECTIVE PRESSURES ACT ON 
INDIVIDUALS AND SOME 
INHERITED VARIATIONS PROVIDE 
A SURVIVAL ADVANTAGE
'RADUALISM AND 
PUNCTUATED EQUILIBRIUM 
ARE TWO HYPOTHESES ABOUT 
THE PACE OF SPECIATION
4HERE IS VARIATION AMONG INDIVIDUALS 
OF A POPULATION DUE TO
ģ
  SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
ģ
  MUTATIONS IN GENES
#HARACTERISTIC 
ADAPTATIONS HELP 
SPECIES SURVIVE IN 
THEIR HABITATS
!NCESTRAL SPECIES 
TRANSFORM OR DIVERGE 
INTO NEW SPECIES 
SPECIATION	
Chapter 4 Graphic Organizer 
2 3296_Chapter_04.indd   302 3296_Chapter_04.indd   3011/4/06   5:37:47 PM11/4/06   5:37:47 PM

Chapter 4
144    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
Understanding Concepts
   1.  Explain the term “selective pressure” as it relates to the 
study of evolution.
   2.  How might the colour of a fi  eld mouse affect its survival?
   3.  Describe the possible fates of a mutation and the effects 
that a mutation may have on a population.
   4.  Describe the relationships among variations, 
adaptations, and natural selection.
   5.  Darwin incorporated observations he made on the 
Beagle expedition into what would eventually become 
the theory of evolution by natural selection. Summarize 
some of these observations.
   6.  Explain why Darwin referred to “descent with 
modifi  cation” rather than “evolution” in On the 
Origin of Species.
Use the following information to answer the following question.
Ord’s Kangaroo Rat
The Ord’s kangaroo rat seems perfectly suited to its 
habitat, the sand dunes of southwestern Alberta. Using its 
long tail and long hind legs, this small mammal can jump 
2 m in the air as it hops away from predators, such as 
snakes and owls.
   7.  Explain how (a) Lamarck and (b) Darwin would 
account for the origin of the long hind legs of the 
Ord’s kangaroo rat.
Use the following information to answer the following question.
Homologous vs. Analogous Structures
The wing of a butterfl  y and the wing of a bird share a 
common function and are both called wings. The bird 
wing and insect wing did not arise from an original 
ancestral structure that became modifi ed through 
evolution into bird wings and butterfl y wings.
   8.  Are the bird wing and the bat wing homologous 
structures? Explain.
   9.  Describe how the anatomy of animals is used to explain 
evolution.
 10.  Baleen whales, such as grey and humpback whales, have 
teeth and body hair as embryos, but not as adults. What 
does this suggest to you about the evolutionary history 
of these animals?
 11.  Explain the role of the environment in the pace of 
speciation.
Applying Concepts
 12.  Describe a breeding program that would help a farmer 
develop a herd of dairy cows that produced more milk 
per cow than another herd of dairy cows.
Use the following information to answer the following question.
Fruit Flies
A researcher sets up an experiment involving two 
populations of fruit fl  y that are genetically very different 
from each other. The two populations are placed in two 
enclosed areas that are connected by a narrow tube 
through which the fl  ies can fi t. 
 13.  Illustrate, using words or diagrams or both, how these 
populations could develop as separate species.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Bean Seeds
A bean is an example of a dicotyledon (having two 
embryonic seed leaves). The cotyledons make up the 
majority of the bean seed. The cotyledons store food for 
the developing embryo in the form of starch.
Suppose that you measured variations in a population 
of bean seeds and found that 80% of the population you 
measure had seeds that were 13 to 17 mm long.
 14. a)  Describe an advantage a large seed size might have 
to a newly germinated bean seedling.
  b)  Identify two environmental pressures that might 
favour a small seed over a larger seed.
  c)  Briefl  y outline a breeding strategy that a gardener 
could use to produce beans with larger cotyledons.
4 3296_Chapter_04_Review.indd   14 3296_Chapter_04_Review.indd   111/4/06   5:37:54 PM11/4/06   5:37:54 PM

Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   145
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Proteins
Proteins are a class of organic compounds that are present 
in and vital to every living cell. Proteins are made of a long 
chain of amino acids. The primary structure of protein 
molecules is determined by the sequence of amino acids. 
The amino acid sequence of a protein determines the 
higher levels of structure of the molecule. A single change 
in the primary structure (the amino acid sequence) can 
have a profound biological change in the overall structure 
and function of the protein.
Scientists compare differences in amino acid sequences to 
determine evolutionary relationships among organisms. 
Some short amino acid sequences are given below.
Amino Acid Sequences in Four Primates
BaboonChimpanzeeLemurHuman
ASNSERALASER
THRTHRTHRTHR
THRALASERALA
GLYGLYGLYGLY
ASPASPGLUASP
GLUGLULYSGLU
VA LVA LVA LVA L
ASPGLUGLUGLU
ASPASPASPASP
SERTHRSERTHR
PROPROPROPRO
GLYGLYGLYGLY
GLYGLYSERGLY
ASNALAHISALA
ASNASNASNASN
 15. a)  Count how many amino acids in a baboon differ 
from the amino acids in a human. Calculate the 
percentage difference by determining the number of 
different amino acids divided by the total number of 
amino acids studied, and multiply by 100. Do the 
same for the chimpanzee and for the lemur.
  b)  Identify the primate that appears to be most closely 
related to the human and identify the primate that 
appears to be least closely related to the human.
  c)  Would an evolutionary biologist draw a conclusion 
based solely on the evidence provided in this chart? 
Explain.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Garter Snakes
AB
The northwest garter snake (Thamnophis ordinoides) (A) 
and the common garter snake (T. sirtalis) (B) occupy 
different habitats in a similar geographic area. The 
northwest garter snake prefers open areas such as 
meadows and rarely enters water. The common garter 
snake is most commonly found near water.
 16.  Explain why these garter snakes are likely to remain 
separate species.
Making Connections
 17.  Choose a fossil, either one described in this chapter or 
one you have researched. Describe how this particular 
fossil helps provide scientists with information on how 
populations change over time. 
 18.  Suppose that you are a family physician who often 
prescribes antibiotics. Make a list of criteria for your 
patients, to help them understand (in terms of 
developing antibiotic resistant bacteria), why they 
must take antibiotics only as prescribed.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Hawaiian Plants
You are a biologist who is working with a student to 
collect plants in Hawaii. You notice that your assistant did 
not label a plant with the name of the island on which is 
was collected. When asked, he explains that he did not 
think this was necessary because he thought that the plant 
was found on all the Hawaiian Islands.
 19.  Write a memo to your assistant clearly outlining why it 
is necessary to label the exact island and location where 
the plant was found, as well as the time when the plant 
was found. Focus your memo on the concepts presented 
in this chapter. 
4 3296_Chapter_04_Review.indd   24 3296_Chapter_04_Review.indd   211/4/06   5:38:00 PM11/4/06   5:38:00 PM

146    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
Career Focus: Ask a Paleontologist
Q    Why are other scientists interested in your research 
fi  ndings?
 I’ve been looking at the interrelationships or 
relationships of dinosaurs based on their 
reproduction. This is an approach that’s never 
been used before.
Q    What made you think of studying dinosaur 
reproduction?
 Generally, scientists have looked more at the demise 
of the dinosaurs and why they went extinct. However, 
I’m interested in why dinosaurs survived for so long 
[165 million years]. I think their long evolutionary 
success can be explained by studying their 
reproductive strategies. 
Q    How do you study the reproductive strategies of 
dinosaurs?
 We examine evidence from dinosaur eggs and 
compare this to evidence from eggs of modern 
crocodiles and birds. We can look at the number of 
eggs in a clutch, the size and shape of the eggs, or the 
pores in the eggshells, which would have allowed the 
embryos inside the eggs to breathe. These features can 
tell us what kind of nesting environment dinosaurs 
most likely used: open, like bird nests, or buried, like 
crocodile nests. 
Q    What else can you learn about dinosaur reproduction 
from dinosaur eggs?
 We can learn about their nesting behaviours. There 
are fossils of dinosaurs sitting on top of their eggs, 
much like modern birds do, from the Gobi Desert 
in Mongolia. Birds use their bodies to incubate or 
brood their eggs. 
Q    Do you think dinosaurs are more related to birds than 
to reptiles?
 Actually, birds are a lineage of dinosaurs—and they 
represent an extremely successful group of living 
animals. With respect to reproduction, I suspect that 
dinosaurs shared strategies with crocodiles and birds, 
or just with birds, or they had reproductive strategies 
unique to themselves. Brooding is an example of a 
reproductive strategy that some dinosaurs share with 
modern birds, but do not share with alligators and 
crocodiles. On the other hand, crocodiles and birds 
only have one functional oviduct, whereas we suspect 
that dinosaurs had two functional oviducts and that 
they laid two eggs at a time. We see evidence of this 
in some dinosaur nests, where the eggs appear to be 
laid in pairs.
Q    Which dinosaurs’ eggs do you work with?
 I’ve worked with eggs from various dinosaurs all over 
the world––some meat-eating, some plant-eating. 
I’ve looked at giant sauropod eggs from France, 
hadrosaur (duck-billed dinosaur) eggs from Alberta, 
prosauropod eggs from South Africa, and the eggs of 
bird-like dinosaurs, called oviraptorids, from Asia.
Q    Where are you currently doing most of your fi  eldwork?  
 In southern Alberta at Devil’s Coulee, a fossilized 
nesting site with preserved dinosaur eggs, embryos, 
and nests. Dinosaurs are a tremendous natural 
resource in Alberta, and we’ve got some of the 
most prolifi  c dinosaur sites in the world. 
Q    Does one have to be a research scientist to be involved 
in paleontology?
 No. There are a lot of amateurs involved in 
paleontology, looking for and studying fossils. The 
Royal Tyrrell Museum has volunteer programs in 
which people help to excavate and prepare fossils. 
Since childhood, Dr. Darla Zelenitsky has been fascinated 
by dinosaurs. Today, she is a paleontologist and 
researcher at the University of Calgary. She works 
in conjunction with the Royal Tyrrell Museum in 
Drumheller, Alberta. Dr. Zelenitsky’s research on 
dinosaur eggs is changing the way that scientists 
look at dinosaur evolution and may help to explain 
the success of many dinosaur species.
3 3296_Chapter_04_CareerFocus.indd   13 3296_Chapter_04_CareerFocus.indd   111/4/06   5:37:49 PM11/4/06   5:37:49 PM

Paleoartist  Trained artists, or researchers with a skill for 
drawing, rely on fossils and other evidence to create visual 
representations of what past life might have looked like. 
Paleoartists may illustrate books, research papers, and 
magazine articles, and may create paintings and other 
visuals for museums, fi  lms, and television. 
Paleotechnician  Technicians (also called fossil 
preparators), along with researchers and volunteers, search 
for and excavate fossils and prepare fossils for study. For 
example, paleotechnologists may carefully remove rock 
from fossilized bones and create models of dinosaurs. 
Paleotechnologists may also help researchers reconstruct 
dinosaur skeletons. An undergraduate degree in geology, 
paleontology, or zoology is good preparation for a career 
as a paleotechnician.
Professional Paleontologist  Researchers with expertise 
in vertebrate or invertebrate paleontology, or other areas 
of paleontology, may work as curators at natural history 
museums. Some paleontologists are professors at 
universities; they teach, train graduate students, and 
conduct various kinds of paleontological research. 
Paleoclimatologist  Scientists examine evidence of 
Earth’s ancient climates by studying tree rings, glaciers, 
and rocks. Paleoclimatologists, who may have graduate 
degrees in Earth sciences, sometimes work with 
paleoecologists, who study ancient environments and 
populations. Paleoclimatologists can help to develop 
computer models for predicting future climate change. 
Stratigrapher  Geoscientists study the formation of rock 
layers in order to learn about past environments. As well, 
they help governments and industries make decisions 
about resource development. To conduct fi eldwork and 
analyses for government agencies, such as the Geological 
Survey of Canada, a doctorate degree in geology is 
required.
Micropaleontologist  Microscopic fossils, such 
as diatoms, are the most abundant type of fossils, 
and their presence can indicate nearby oil or 
gas deposits. Micropaleontologists, who have 
undergraduate degrees in geology, work with 
petroleum companies to fi  nd sources of 
fossil fuels. 
Go Further...
 1.  List and research three methods, 
other than studying dinosaur 
eggs, that paleontologists could 
use to study the evolutionary 
relationships between dinosaurs 
and birds.
 2.  How might geneticists contribute 
to the study of past life forms?
 3.  Why is it important to understand 
the process of evolution in order 
to make informed decisions about 
human actions that could affect 
Earth’s biodiversity?
Other Careers Related to Paleontology
This model shows what a newly hatched 
dinosaur may have looked like in a nest.
Chapter 4  Mechanisms of Population Change • MHR   
147
3 3296_Chapter_04_CareerFocus.indd   23 3296_Chapter_04_CareerFocus.indd   211/4/06   5:37:51 PM11/4/06   5:37:51 PM

148    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
2
UNIT
Understanding Concepts
   1.  Defi  ne the term “population.”
   2.  Describe the study of ecology.
   3.  Hypothesize what might happen if all the predators 
were eliminated from an ecosystem.
   4.  Explain why organisms are not evenly distributed 
across Earth.
   5.  Identify three abiotic factors that create different 
habitats within a pond, and illustrate their effects 
on the pond ecosystem.
   6.  Identify four factors that might limit the population size 
of animals (such as a raven) that live as scavengers.
   7.  Give an example of (a) biome, (b) an ecosystem within 
the biome, and (c) a community within this ecosystem.
   8.  Explain why two species classifi  ed in the same family 
must also be in the same order.
   9.  Give an example of how (a) an abiotic factor and 
(b) a biotic factor can limit population growth.
 10.  Identify the factors that might produce regular 
population cycles typical of small herbivore species, 
such as mice and squirrels.
 11.  The following metaphor can be used to describe the 
terms habitat and niche. “The habitat of a species can be 
compared to an address, while its ecological niche can 
be compared to a job.” Write another metaphor to 
describe the range of an organism.
 12.  Pick an organism that lives in an environment you are 
familiar with. List the factors that might limit the 
growth of its population.
 13.  Give three examples of how a population of deer mice 
in a fi  eld might compete for the available resources.
 14.  Explain why diversity within a population is necessary 
for evolution. 
 15.  Explain the differences among structural (physical), 
physiological, and behavioural adaptations. Give an 
example of each.
 16.  Are a bat wing and a butterfl  y wing homologous 
structures? Explain your answer.
 17.  Explain why it is correct to talk about the evolution 
of populations, but it is incorrect to talk about the 
evolution of individual organisms.
 18.  Distinguish between a fact and a theory. Give an 
example of each.
 19.  Explain why DNA is a useful tool for determining 
possible relationships among species of organisms. 
Give an example to support your answer.
 20.  Describe how the following items contributed to 
Darwin’s theory of evolution:
  a)  his experiences on the voyage of the Beagle
  b) Lyell’s Principles of Geology
  c)  Malthus’s essay about populations
 21. a)  Describe the possible fates of a mutation and the 
effects that a mutation may have on a population.
  b)  Explain what could happen in a population when 
a mutation provides a selective advantage.
 22. a)  Give an example of a geographical barrier and 
a biological barrier.
  b)  Explain how each barrier keeps species separate.
 23.  Life is very diverse, but all species share many features, 
especially at the cellular and molecular level. How can 
evolution explain this seeming contradiction?
 24.  You are a paleontologist and fi  nd a fossilized skeleton 
of a whale-like aquatic animal with tiny legs. Is this a 
transitional fossil? Explain your answer. 
Applying Concepts
Use the following information to answer the next question.
AB
Dichotomous Key
 1a.  front and hind wings similar in size and shape, and 
folded parallel to the body when at rest... damsel fl y
 1b.  hind wings wider than front wings near base, and 
extended on either side of the body when at rest...
dragonfl y
 25. a)  Use the dichotomous key provided to identify the 
organisms in the diagrams. Explain how you arrived 
at your decision.
  b)  From the key and the diagrams, explain why you 
could infer that dragonfl  ies and damsel fl ies evolved 
from a common ancestor.
3296_Unit_02_Review.indd   13296_Unit_02_Review.indd   111/4/06   7:20:19 PM11/4/06   7:20:19 PM

Unit 2  Review • MHR   149
Use the following information to answer the next question.
The following shows the levels of classifi  cation for a grey 
wolf. These levels are not in order according to the 
hierarchical classifi  cation system in use today.
order: Carnivora
class: Mammalia
kingdom: Animalia
phylum: Chordata
domain: Eukarya
species: lupus
family: Canidae
genus: Canis
 26. a)  Place the levels of classifi  cation in order from most 
general to most specifi c.
  b)  Identify the scientifi  c name of the grey wolf.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Grizzly Bears
Female grizzly bears typically have only one offspring 
every three to fi  ve years. Black bears, however, have their 
offspring (often twins or even triplets) every two years. 
Female grizzlies do not begin breeding until they are fi ve 
to seven years old, whereas female black bears begin 
breeding when they are from three to fi  ve years old. 
Grizzly bears and black bears are omnivores, but grizzly 
bears have a more restricted diet and are more particular 
about their dining sites. Grizzly bears are also larger than 
black bears.
 27. a)  Identify which species of bear is more likely to 
become endangered as changes occur in their habitat 
and explain your reasoning.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Grizzly bears can mate with black bears, but the offspring 
are not fertile. On the other hand, grizzly bears can mate 
with polar bears, and the offspring are fertile. 
  b)  Infer the evolutionary relationship among grizzly 
bears, black bears, and polar bears.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Stomata are openings on the surfaces of leaves that allow 
plants to release water. The following graph shows the 
number of stomata on the leaves of one tree species.




!"


/..3"#
CjbWZgd[hidbViV
6kZgV\ZcjbWZgd[hidbViV^c&%aZVkZhd[
&%igZZhd[dcZheZX^Zh^c[djg8VcVY^Vcegdk^cXZh
 28. a)  Describe what these data might tell you about the 
precipitation in the areas where the data were 
collected.
  b)  Based on these data, infer the relationship between 
precipitation and number of stomata on trees.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Transect
In order to estimate the size of a population of oak tress, 
a forester runs several 100 m transects through a 100 ha 
(hectare) woodlot and counts the number of oaks within 
5 m of the transect line. Five transects produced counts of: 
15, 17, 25, 16, and 20 oak trees respectively.
 29.  a)  Use this information to calculate the density of oak 
trees in this area.
  b)  Estimate the size of the oak population in the 
woodlot.
  c)  Identify another method the forester could have used 
to sample the population of trees in this woodlot.
 30.  Outline an experimental procedure that would 
demonstrate variation within a population of corn. 
Consider using the length of corn cob or the number 
of kernels of corn per cob in your experimental design. 
Include a suitable hypothesis.
 31.  Describe the relationships among mutations, variations, 
adaptation, and natural selection.
 32.  An evolutionary biologist said, “Evolution is like 
modifying a machine while it’s still running.” Interpret 
this statement.
3296_Unit_02_Review.indd   23296_Unit_02_Review.indd   211/4/06   7:20:21 PM11/4/06   7:20:21 PM

150    MHR  •  Unit 2  Ecosystems and Population Change
 33. a)  Use graphics software and point-form notes to show 
the two pathways that can lead to the formation of a 
new species. 
ICT
ICT
  b)  Identify the evolutionary pathway that leads to an 
increase in biodiversity and explain why.
 34.  Explain how the following situations are reproductive 
barriers that keep species separate.
  a)  Species of fi refl  ies use distinctive patterns of fl ashes.
  b)  Two species of grass fl  ower at different times of year, 
yet live in the same environment.
  c)  The crossing of two species of fl  y produces a fertile 
hybrid offspring, whose offspring is weak and 
infertile.
 35.  Use word processing or graphics software to make a 
graphic organizer showing the relationship among 
climate, soil, plants, and animals in a biome. 
ICT
ICT
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Protecting our Forests
Governments restrict the movement of plants or animals 
across boundaries, including provincial borders. In 
Alberta, for example, people are not allowed to transport 
wood with bark on it into the province. These measures 
are designed to help prevent the spread of mountain pine 
beetles and Dutch elm disease that can harm Alberta’s 
forests—one of the prime concerns during outbreaks of 
pine mountain beetle is the death of high-value pines in 
thousands of hectares of forest. 
The fungus that accompanies the mountain pine beetle 
larvae reduces the aesthetic value of forests by staining 
the wood blue; the mountain pine beetle also reduces the 
timber volume, and the monetary gains of the high-value 
mature tree. During the last mountain pine beetle 
outbreak (1977 to 1987) in Alberta, an estimated 
1 068 167 m
3
 of lodgepole pine were killed.
 36.  Explain, both in terms of the ecosystems in Alberta and 
the economic impact of these types of pest outbreaks, 
why it is important for all citizens to respect this type of 
restriction.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Trout
The population of trout in a small lake has fl uctuated 
around 2000 for the last 10 years. The owner of a fi shing 
resort on the lake wants to increase the number of trout 
available for clients to catch. The owner plans to stock the 
lake with 1000 more individuals of the same species.
 37.  Predict the short term and long terms effects of adding 
the additional fi  sh on the population of trout in this 
lake.
 38.  Compare the diversity of habitats and the biodiversity 
in a forest that has been logged and replanted with a 
single species of tree to a forest that has not been logged.
 39.  Explain how the examination of proteins in individual 
organisms can demonstrate relatedness among species.
 40.  Explain the conditions in which a seemingly neutral 
mutation that is present in a small portion of a 
population might become quickly perpetuated in, 
and advantageous to, the entire population.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Models for Evolution
AB
4IME4IME
NEW SPECIES
DIVERGENCE
NEW SPECIES
DIVERGENCE
Two models for evolution are shown in the diagram above.
 41.  Identify each model, and explain how each is used to 
model evolution.
 42.  Use word processing or graphics software to produce a 
timeline outlining the major events and ideas that have 
led to the current theory of evolution. 
ICT
ICT
3296_Unit_02_Review.indd   33296_Unit_02_Review.indd   311/4/06   7:20:23 PM11/4/06   7:20:23 PM

Unit 2  Review • MHR   151
Making Connections
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Frog Populations
Imagine two frog populations in two different locations. 
The frogs differ only in the colour of their skin.
 43. a)  Suggest data that would help you decide if both 
populations belong to the same species of frog.
  b)  Assume that the two populations are different 
species. Suggest data that would help you decide how 
closely related these two species are to each other.
 44.  Should people be as concerned about some species 
of mosses becoming extinct as they are about whales 
becoming extinct? Explain.
 45.  All populations eventually face limits to their 
population because of abiotic and biotic factors. 
Compare a micro-organism (such as the bacteria 
E. coli), a plant species (such as a tree), and a mammal 
(such as a deer), with respect to the types of factors that 
might limit the growth of populations of these species.
 46.  Many of the endangered species in the world have very 
specifi  c, or narrow, ecological niches. Explain why 
species with narrow ecological niches are more likely 
to become extinct than species with broader ecological 
niches.
 47.  Given your understanding of diversity within a species 
and natural selection, explain why it is important to 
maintain biodiversity.
 48.  Do you think antibiotics should be available in a 
pharmacy without a prescription? Explain your 
answer in terms of natural selection.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Level of Chlorophyll a






9VnhV[iZg[addY^c\
8]adgde]naa
V
b\$
b
'

The graph above shows the level of chlorophyll a (a 
pigment needed for photosynthesis) in a stream, in the 
days following a fl  ood that nearly scoured all life from the 
stream. The chlorophyll indicates the growth of algae in 
the stream.
 49. a)  Compare the amount of growth in the fi  rst 30 days 
with the amount of growth in the second 30 days.
  b)  Explain what might be enhancing or limiting the 
algae growth in this 60-day period.
  c)  The main animals in this stream are invertebrates 
that feed off the algae. Predict what might be 
happening to the populations of these herbivorous 
invertebrates during this 60-day time period.
Use the following information to answer the next question.
Pests
You are a gardening expert who runs a local greenhouse 
and nursery. A gardener calls you and explains that she 
had an insect infestation in her garden. When she applied 
an insecticide, 99 percent of the insects were killed. After a 
few weeks, she noticed that the insect problem was back so 
she applied more pesticide. This time, only 50 percent of 
the insects were killed by the pesticide.
 50.  Explain why the insecticide did not work as well the 
second time it was applied.
3296_Unit_02_Review.indd   43296_Unit_02_Review.indd   411/4/06   7:20:24 PM11/4/06   7:20:24 PM