382  MHR  Unit 5  The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
the synapse. The muscle ﬁ bre cell could 
not repolarize and would remain in a 
state of excitation (contraction). 
 Normally, an enzyme called 
cholinesterase is released into a synapse, 
where it breaks down acetylcholine. 
Cholinesterase is one of the fastest acting 
enzymes. It breaks down acetylcholine so 
that it can be removed from the protein 
receptors, thus allowing the ion channels 
to close and the membrane to repolarize 
in a fraction of a second. A nerve gas 
called sarin destroys this function by 
blocking the release of cholinesterase 
into the neuromuscular junction. With 
the buildup of acetylcholine, critical 
muscles, such as the heart and diaphragm, 
enter a state of constant contraction or 
paralysis. Some insecticides affect insects 
in the same way and kill them.
 There are more than 50 substances 
in the human body that can act as 
neurotransmitters. Table 11.2 lists 
some common neurotransmitters and 
their functions. The functions vary 
depending on where in the body 
the neurotransmitter acts. Several 
neurological disorders have been linked 
to neurotransmitter deﬁ ciencies or 
excessive production. In addition, certain 
drugs can alter the proper action of 
neurotransmitters, as described in 
Thought Lab 11.1.
2 Compare the excitatory 
and inhibitory effects of 
neurotransmitters on the 
postsynaptic membrane.
2 Compare and relate the functions 
of acetylcholine and cholinesterase.
• • •
• • •
Section 11.1 Summary
• The human nervous system is a 
complex system composed of many 
subsystems that all work together to 
maintain homeostasis in the body. 
• The nervous system gathers and 
processes information from the 
external and internal environments 
and then relays a response to the 
necessary areas of the body.
• The neuron is the functional unit 
of the nervous system. 
• There are three kinds of neurons: 
sensory neurons, interneurons, and 
motor neurons. 
• Neurons allow the nervous system to 
relay sensory information to the brain 
and spinal cord for integration, and to 
produce a response, as needed, by the 
effectors. 
• All cells have a membrane potential, 
but the neuron is unique in that it can 
change the potential of its membrane 
to generate an impulse. An impulse is 
Table 11.2  Selected Neurotransmitters and Their Functions
Neurotransmitter Function Effects of abnormal production
dopamine affects the brain synapses in the control of body 
movements; is linked to sensations of pleasure, 
such as eating
excessive production linked to schizophrenia, a 
disorder in which the individual’s perception of reality 
is greatly distorted; inadequate production linked to 
Parkinson’s disease, a progressive disorder that destroys 
neurons, causing tremors, slurred speech, and other 
coordination problems
serotonin regulates temperature and sensory perception; 
is involved in mood control
inadequate amounts in the brain synapses linked 
to depression
endorphins act as natural painkillers in synapses in the brain; 
also affects emotional areas of the brain
deﬁ ciency linked to an increased risk of alcoholism
norepinephrine is used by the brain and some autonomic neurons; 
complements the actions of the hormone epinephrine, 
which readies the body to respond to danger or other 
stressful situations
overproduction linked to high blood pressure, anxiety, 
and insomnia; deﬁ ciency linked to hunger cravings 
and exhaustion
BiologyFile 
FYI
Acupuncture is a traditional 
Chinese medical practice in 
which needles are inserted 
at speciﬁ c points on the 
body. Based on Western 
scientiﬁ c thinking, it is 
hypothesized that the 
resulting stimulation of 
these points triggers the 
brain to release endorphins, 
neurotransmitters that 
ease the sensation of pain. 
Traditional Eastern scientiﬁ c 
thinking explains 
acupuncture in terms of 
rebalancing the body’s 
chi—its life-force energy.
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   172 3296_Chapter_11.indd   17 11/4/06   6:18:43 PM11/4/06   6:18:43 PM