394  MHR  Unit 5  The Nervous and Endocrine Systems
see inside an active, human brain. 
Fundamental discoveries in physics have 
led to the development of positron-
emission tomography (PET) and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
These two techniques allow researchers 
to study the brain and help physicians 
diagnose brain diseases.
 PET is based on the fact that more 
active areas of the brain have higher 
energy demands. A person receives an 
injection of radioactively-labelled 
glucose, and a scanner monitors glucose 
consumption in the person’s brain. 
Different colours represent different 
activity levels in the brain (Figure 11.32). 
A PET scan can be used to diagnose 
conditions such as a stroke or Alzheimer’s 
disease, in which the deterioration of the 
brain leads to memory loss and confusion, 
and eventual lack of conscious movement.
 MRI can produce very clear and 
detailed images of brain structure (Figure 
11.33). A giant magnet surrounds the 
person’s head, and changes in the 
direction of the magnetic ﬁ eld induce 
hydrogen atoms in the brain to emit 
radio signals. These signals can then be 
detected, translated, and displayed as a 
structural or functional image. MRI can 
also be used to identify various brain 
disorders, such as brain tumours. Figure 
11.33 also shows an MRI image of a 
human brain affected by Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease. This disease, like BSE, destroys 
the brain tissue, making it sponge-like. 
2 Describe how early researchers 
studied brain structure and 
function.
2 Compare the technologies of 
MRI and PET for studying the 
brain.
  
  
Section 11.2 Summary
• The regulation centre for the nervous 
system is the central nervous system, 
which consists of the brain and spinal 
cord.
• The brain and spinal cord are protected 
by the cerebrospinal ﬂ uid, the 
meninges, and the skull and spinal 
column (vertebrae). 
• The brain and spinal cord themselves 
are composed of myelinated neurons 
(white matter) and unmyelinated 
neurons (grey matter). 
• The hindbrain is composed of the 
cerebellum (involved in controlling 
body movements), medulla oblongata 
(controls many involuntary responses), 
and pons (relay station between 
different parts of brain). 
• The midbrain is a part of the brain stem. 
 4.  Follow your teacher’s instructions to dispose of the 
sheep brain and wash the dissecting tray.
Analysis
 1.  Examine your diagram of the cross-section of the 
dissected brain. Make a table to record the functions 
of the structures you labelled in your diagram.
Conclusion
 2.  Compare the sheep brain with the human brain 
shown in Figure 11.29. What similarities and 
differences can you identify?
Extension
 3.  With a partner, build a model of the human brain 
and present it to the class. Include all the key 
structures and functions on your model. 
Figure 11.32  This PET 
scan shows a cross section 
of the cerebrum, revealing 
the activity levels in 
different areas when the 
brain is performing certain 
tasks. Red, orange, and 
yellow indicate areas of 
high, medium, and low 
activity, respectively. What 
lobes of the cerebral cortex 
are active in the brain 
shown here?
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   292 3296_Chapter_11.indd   29 11/4/06   6:20:02 PM11/4/06   6:20:02 PM