Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  375
Modelling Resting Membrane Potential
In this investigation, you will build a simple model of 
the neural membrane to demonstrate how the resting 
membrane potential is established.
Question
How does the resting neural membrane generate an 
electric potential?
  
Safety Precautions
Wash your hands after completing this investigation, or 
immediately if your skin is exposed to the solutions used. 
Wear goggles to protect your eyes against accidental 
splashes. The solutions used are irritating to the eyes.
Materials
• 3 mol/L sodium  • 3 mol/L potassium 
chloride solution  chloride solution
• 22 cm of moistened  • 2 strips of uninsulated 
dialysis tubing  copper wire, each 40 cm long
• string • DC millivolt meter
• elastic band • 400 mL beaker
• pen
Procedure
 1.  Create a table to record the data collected. 
 2.  With your group, take the two 40-cm strips of copper 
wire and tightly wind one end of each around a pen 
in order to form a coil of about 8 cm.
 3.  Attach the uncoiled ends to the millivolt meter, as 
shown below. Each wire will serve as an electrode.
 4.  Pour about 300 mL of the sodium chloride solution 
into the 400 mL beaker. Take the copper electrode 
attached to the positive terminal of the meter, and 
immerse the free end in the solution.
 5.  Tie off one end of moistened dialysis tubing. Fill two 
thirds of the tubing with potassium chloride solution. 
Place the free end of the other copper electrode in the 
solution in the tubing. Secure the end of the tubing 
around the wire with an elastic band. 
 6.  While another group member observes the needle 
on the millivolt meter, place the dialysis tubing in the 
beaker that contains the solution of sodium chloride. 
(If sensor probes are available, these can be used to 
measure and monitor the electric potential.)
 7.  Leave the dialysis tubing in the beaker, and continue to 
monitor the electric potential every 5 min, until a trend 
is established. Record each value in your data table.
Analysis
 1.  Graph the data from your data table.
 2.  Explain what the dialysis tubing, potassium chloride 
solution, and sodium chloride represent in this 
model of a resting neuron. 
 3.  Compare the electric potential created in this model 
with a resting membrane potential in a neuron.
 4.  Compare your results with the results of other groups 
in your class. Provide a reason for any differences. 
 5.  Hypothesize how you might be able to increase the 
electric potential across the dialysis tubing.
Conclusions
 6.  a) Describe what happened to the magnitude of the 
electric potential over time, and explain why this 
happened. 
  b) If this occurred in a neuron, what would happen?
 7.  a) How did your model illustrate the mechanism 
of ion channel diffusion?
  b) Summarize all the factors that establish resting 
membrane potential in a neuron, including the 
mechanism of ion channel diffusion illustrated 
by your model. 
11.B
INVESTIGATION
 Target Skills
Gathering and analyzing data from a 
model of a neuron
Working as a team to carry out 
experimental procedures and assess results
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   102 3296_Chapter_11.indd   10 11/4/06   6:17:53 PM11/4/06   6:17:53 PM