Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  399
Caffeine, for example, is a commonly 
used stimulant that causes the 
sympathetic nervous system to increase 
the heart rate and blood pressure. 
2 What type of motor neurons are 
involved in the autonomic 
nervous system?
2 What generally triggers the 
sympathetic nervous system, and 
what are its effects on the body?
2 What generally triggers the 
parasympathetic nervous system, 
and what are its effects on the 
body?
  
  
Section 11.3 Summary
• The peripheral nervous system 
contains components that gather 
sensory information and then relay 
this information to the muscles and 
glands for a voluntary (somatic) or 
involuntary (autonomic) response.
• Homeostasis is maintained in the body 
by the often-antagonistic actions of the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic 
nervous systems. 
• In general, the sympathetic nervous 
system prepares the body for ﬁ ght-
or-ﬂ ight, while the parasympathetic 
system returns the organs to a resting 
state.
 1.  Compare the general functions of the central nervous 
system with the functions of the peripheral nervous 
system.
 2.  Identify which division of the peripheral nervous 
system is under voluntary control and which division 
is under involuntary control. Compare the functions 
of these two divisions. 
 3.  Imagine that you are hiking in the mountains one 
afternoon with friends. As you turn a corner, you come 
across a mother bear and her cubs standing in the 
middle of the trail.
a) Identify the speciﬁ c division of the nervous system 
that is responsible for the body’s response to this 
situation. 
  b) Describe at least six physiological responses you 
might have upon seeing the bears.
  c) Indicate the division of the nervous system that 
is responsible for returning the body back to 
equilibrium after the event is over. 
 4.  Use word processing software to construct a three-
column table. Use the following headings: Body 
structures, Sympathetic stimulation effect, and 
Parasympathetic stimulation effect. In the ﬁ rst column, 
list these structures: eyes, salivary glands, bronchioles, 
heart, liver, adrenal glands, kidneys, stomach, pancreas, 
intestines, and bladder. Then complete the rest of the 
table. ICTICT
 5.  Compare how stimulants and depressants affect the 
nervous system. Name a common stimulant.
Review
Section  11.3
Figure 11.37  A polygraph. It can detect some 
of the physiological changes caused by the 
sympathetic nervous system when placed in a 
stressful situation. A racing heart and sweaty 
palms can be caused by many different factors, 
however, which is why polygraphs are not totally 
reliable.
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   342 3296_Chapter_11.indd   34 11/4/06   6:20:35 PM11/4/06   6:20:35 PM