Chapter 11  The Nervous System  MHR  383
A drug is a non-food substance that changes the way the 
body functions. Most drugs, legal or illegal, affect the neurons 
and synapses by either promoting or decreasing the action 
of a neurotransmitter. Research has shown that many 
addictive drugs stimulate the brain’s natural reward and 
pleasure centres, often by artiﬁ cially elevating the levels of 
neurotransmitters, such as dopamine or endorphins. The 
table brieﬂ y describes the major effects of some commonly 
abused addictive drugs.
Procedure
 1.  Working with a partner, use the information in the table 
to create a drug information pamphlet about one of the 
drugs presented. If possible, research the drug further 
using Internet or library resources. Your information 
pamphlet should include
• a detailed explanation of how the drug affects the 
nervous system and other body functions
• hazards to the nervous system and the entire body 
from short-term and long-term use of the drug 
Effects of Selected Drugs on Human Systems 
Drug Effects on nervous system and body
nicotine
 • is derived from the tobacco plant 
• is one of the main addictive ingredients in cigarettes and chewing tobacco, which cause 
cancer, respiratory problems, and other problems after long-term use
• rapidly stimulates the reward centre of the brain to release dopamine, which promotes 
feelings of euphoria
• stimulates certain areas of the body by mimicking the actions of acetylcholine, causing 
increased heart rate and blood pressure
marijuana
 • is harvested from the ﬂ owers and leaves of certain types of Cannabis plant
• when smoked, active ingredient (THC) interferes with synapses in the brain, including 
the reward centres
• produces feelings of euphoria, and reduces concentration and muscle coordination
ecstasy (MDMA)
 • affects neurons in the brain, causing overproduction of serotonin
• in the short term, produces feelings of pleasure
• can cause cardiac arrest, dangerously elevated body temperature, and rapid and permanent 
brain damage
cocaine
 • is naturally found in leaves of Erythroxylon coca, a species of coca plant
• targets neurons in the reward centre of the brain and prevents the re-uptake of dopamine
• increases energy levels and produces feelings of euphoria
• is highly addictive and can cause strokes and heart attacks
methamphetamine
(meth, crystal meth)
• enters the neuron by passing directly through neuron membranes
• causes excessive release of dopamine and blocks the dopamine transporter from pumping 
dopamine back into the transmitting neuron
• increases energy levels and produces feelings of euphoria
• often leads to extreme aggressiveness, delusions, and psychosis (greatly distorted perception 
of reality)
 2.  Present your pamphlet to another group or to the rest 
of the class. 
Analysis
 1.  Hypothesize what might make the drug you investigated 
addictive. Suggest a possible mechanism, based on how 
the drug affects the nervous system, that explains why 
the body could become addicted to the drug.
Extension 
 2.  Debate the effects of drug use on society as a whole.
Thought LabThought Lab
 11.1 The Effect of Drugs 
on Neurons and Synapses
Target Skills
Analyzing and explaining how 
different drugs affect neural impulses
Working cooperatively to investigate 
the effects of a drug on neurons or 
neural synapses
Hypothesizing what might make 
some drugs addictive
2 3296_Chapter_11.indd   182 3296_Chapter_11.indd   18 11/4/06   6:18:44 PM11/4/06   6:18:44 PM